mr. speaker, mr. vice president, members of congress, my fellow americans: today in america, a teacher spent extra time with a student who needed it, and did her part to lift america’s graduation rate to its highest level in more than three decades. an entrepreneur flipped on the lights in her tech startup, and did her part to add to the more than eight million new jobs our businesses have created over the past four years. an autoworker fine-tuned some of the best, most fuel-efficient cars in the world, and did his part to help america wean itself off foreign oil. a farmer prepared for the spring after the strongest five-year stretch of farm exports in our history. a rural doctor gave a young child the first prescription to treat asthma that his mother could afford. a man took the bus home from the graveyard shift, bone-tired but dreaming big dreams for his son. and in tight-knit communities across america, fathers and mothers will tuck in their kids, put an arm around their spouse, remember fallen comrades, and give thanks for being home from a war that, after twelve long years, is finally coming to an end. tonight, this chamber speaks with one voice to the people we represent: it is you, our citizens, who make the state of our union strong. here are the results of your efforts: the lowest unemployment rate in over five years. a rebounding housing market. a manufacturing sector that’s adding jobs for the first time since the 1990s. more oil produced at home than we buy from the rest of the world – the first time that’s happened in nearly twenty years. our deficits – cut by more than half. and for the first time in over a decade, business leaders around the world have declared that china is no longer the world’s number one place to invest; america is. that’s why i believe this can be a breakthrough year for america. after five years of grit and determined effort, the united states is better-positioned for the 21st century than any other nation on earth. the question for everyone in this chamber, running through every decision we make this year, is whether we are going to help or hinder this progress. for several years now, this town has been consumed by a rancorous argument over the proper size of the federal government. it’s an important debate – one that dates back to our very founding. but when that debate prevents us from carrying out even the most basic functions of our democracy – when our differences shut down government or threaten the full faith and credit of the united states – then we are not doing right by the american people. as president, i’m committed to making washington work better, and rebuilding the trust of the people who sent us here. i believe most of you are, too. last month, thanks to the work of democrats and republicans, this congress finally produced a budget that undoes some of last year’s severe cuts to priorities like education. nobody got everything they wanted, and we can still do more to invest in this country’s future while bringing down our deficit in a balanced way. but the budget compromise should leave us freer to focus on creating new jobs, not creating new crises. in the coming months, let’s see where else we can make progress together. let’s make this a year of action. that’s what most americans want – for all of us in this chamber to focus on their lives, their hopes, their aspirations. and what i believe unites the people of this nation, regardless of race or region or party, young or old, rich or poor, is the simple, profound belief in opportunity for all – the notion that if you work hard and take responsibility, you can get ahead. let’s face it: that belief has suffered some serious blows. over more than three decades, even before the great recession hit, massive shifts in technology and global competition had eliminated a lot of good, middle-class jobs, and weakened the economic foundations that families depend on. today, after four years of economic growth, corporate profits and stock prices have rarely been higher, and those at the top have never done better. but average wages have barely budged. inequality has deepened. upward mobility has stalled. the cold, hard fact is that even in the midst of recovery, too many americans are working more than ever just to get by – let alone get ahead. and too many still aren’t working at all. our job is to reverse these trends. it won’t happen right away, and we won’t agree on everything. but what i offer tonight is a set of concrete, practical proposals to speed up growth, strengthen the middle class, and build new ladders of opportunity into the middle class. some require congressional action, and i’m eager to work with all of you. but america does not stand still – and neither will i. so wherever and whenever i can take steps without legislation to expand opportunity for more american families, that’s what i’m going to do. as usual, our first lady sets a good example. michelle’s let’s move partnership with schools, businesses, and local leaders has helped bring down childhood obesity rates for the first time in thirty years – an achievement that will improve lives and reduce health care costs for decades to come. the joining forces alliance that michelle and jill biden launched has already encouraged employers to hire or train nearly 400,000 veterans and military spouses. taking a page from that playbook, the white house just organized a college opportunity summit where already, 150 universities, businesses, and nonprofits have made concrete commitments to reduce inequality in access to higher education – and help every hardworking kid go to college and succeed when they get to campus. across the country, we’re partnering with mayors, governors, and state legislatures on issues from homelessness to marriage equality. the point is, there are millions of americans outside washington who are tired of stale political arguments, and are moving this country forward. they believe, and i believe, that here in america, our success should depend not on accident of birth, but the strength of our work ethic and the scope of our dreams. that’s what drew our forebears here. it’s how the daughter of a factory worker is ceo of america’s largest automaker; how the son of a barkeeper is speaker of the house; how the son of a single mom can be president of the greatest nation on earth. opportunity is who we are. and the defining project of our generation is to restore that promise. we know where to start: the best measure of opportunity is access to a good job. with the economy picking up speed, companies say they intend to hire more people this year. and over half of big manufacturers say they’re thinking of insourcing jobs from abroad. so let’s make that decision easier for more companies. both democrats and republicans have argued that our tax code is riddled with wasteful, complicated loopholes that punish businesses investing here, and reward companies that keep profits abroad. let’s flip that equation. let’s work together to close those loopholes, end those incentives to ship jobs overseas, and lower tax rates for businesses that create jobs here at home. moreover, we can take the money we save with this transition to tax reform to create jobs rebuilding our roads, upgrading our ports, unclogging our commutes – because in today’s global economy, first-class jobs gravitate to first-class infrastructure. we’ll need congress to protect more than three million jobs by finishing transportation and waterways bills this summer. but i will act on my own to slash bureaucracy and streamline the permitting process for key projects, so we can get more construction workers on the job as fast as possible. we also have the chance, right now, to beat other countries in the race for the next wave of hightech manufacturing jobs. my administration has launched two hubs for high-tech manufacturing in raleigh and youngstown, where we’ve connected businesses to research universities that can help america lead the world in advanced technologies. tonight, i’m announcing we’ll launch six more this year. bipartisan bills in both houses could double the number of these hubs and the jobs they create. so get those bills to my desk and put more americans back to work. let’s do more to help the entrepreneurs and small business owners who create most new jobs in america. over the past five years, my administration has made more loans to small business owners than any other. and when ninety-eight percent of our exporters are small businesses, new trade partnerships with europe and the asia-pacific will help them create more jobs. we need to work together on tools like bipartisan trade promotion authority to protect our workers, protect our environment, and open new markets to new goods stamped “made in the usa.” china and europe aren’t standing on the sidelines. neither should we. we know that the nation that goes all-in on innovation today will own the global economy tomorrow. this is an edge america cannot surrender. federally-funded research helped lead to the ideas and inventions behind google and smartphones. that’s why congress should undo the damage done by last year’s cuts to basic research so we can unleash the next great american discovery – whether it’s vaccines that stay ahead of drug-resistant bacteria, or paper-thin material that’s stronger than steel. and let’s pass a patent reform bill that allows our businesses to stay focused on innovation, not costly, needless litigation. now, one of the biggest factors in bringing more jobs back is our commitment to american energy. the all-of-the-above energy strategy i announced a few years ago is working, and today, america is closer to energy independence than we’ve been in decades. one of the reasons why is natural gas – if extracted safely, it’s the bridge fuel that can power our economy with less of the carbon pollution that causes climate change. businesses plan to invest almost $100 billion in new factories that use natural gas. i’ll cut red tape to help states get those factories built, and this congress can help by putting people to work building fueling stations that shift more cars and trucks from foreign oil to american natural gas. my administration will keep working with the industry to sustain production and job growth while strengthening protection of our air, our water, and our communities. and while we’re at it, i’ll use my authority to protect more of our pristine federal lands for future generations. it’s not just oil and natural gas production that’s booming; we’re becoming a global leader in solar, too. every four minutes, another american home or business goes solar; every panel pounded into place by a worker whose job can’t be outsourced. let’s continue that progress with a smarter tax policy that stops giving $4 billion a year to fossil fuel industries that don’t need it, so that we can invest more in fuels of the future that do. and even as we’ve increased energy production, we’ve partnered with businesses, builders, and local communities to reduce the energy we consume. when we rescued our automakers, for example, we worked with them to set higher fuel efficiency standards for our cars. in the coming months, i’ll build on that success by setting new standards for our trucks, so we can keep driving down oil imports and what we pay at the pump. taken together, our energy policy is creating jobs and leading to a cleaner, safer planet. over the past eight years, the united states has reduced our total carbon pollution more than any other nation on earth. but we have to act with more urgency – because a changing climate is already harming western communities struggling with drought, and coastal cities dealing with floods. that’s why i directed my administration to work with states, utilities, and others to set new standards on the amount of carbon pollution our power plants are allowed to dump into the air. the shift to a cleaner energy economy won’t happen overnight, and it will require tough choices along the way. but the debate is settled. climate change is a fact. and when our children’s children look us in the eye and ask if we did all we could to leave them a safer, more stable world, with new sources of energy, i want us to be able to say yes, we did. finally, if we are serious about economic growth, it is time to heed the call of business leaders, labor leaders, faith leaders, and law enforcement – and fix our broken immigration system. republicans and democrats in the senate have acted. i know that members of both parties in the house want to do the same. independent economists say immigration reform will grow our economy and shrink our deficits by almost $1 trillion in the next two decades. and for good reason: when people come here to fulfill their dreams – to study, invent, and contribute to our culture – they make our country a more attractive place for businesses to locate and create jobs for everyone. so let’s get immigration reform done this year. the ideas i’ve outlined so far can speed up growth and create more jobs. but in this rapidlychanging economy, we have to make sure that every american has the skills to fill those jobs. the good news is, we know how to do it. two years ago, as the auto industry came roaring back, andra rush opened up a manufacturing firm in detroit. she knew that ford needed parts for the best-selling truck in america, and she knew how to make them. she just needed the workforce. so she dialed up what we call an american job center – places where folks can walk in to get the help or training they need to find a new job, or better job. she was flooded with new workers. and today, detroit manufacturing systems has more than 700 employees. what andra and her employees experienced is how it should be for every employer – and every job seeker. so tonight, i’ve asked vice president biden to lead an across-the-board reform of america’s training programs to make sure they have one mission: train americans with the skills employers need, and match them to good jobs that need to be filled right now. that means more on-the-job training, and more apprenticeships that set a young worker on an upward trajectory for life. it means connecting companies to community colleges that can help design training to fill their specific needs. and if congress wants to help, you can concentrate funding on proven programs that connect more ready-to-work americans with ready-to-be-filled jobs. i’m also convinced we can help americans return to the workforce faster by reforming unemployment insurance so that it’s more effective in today’s economy. but first, this congress needs to restore the unemployment insurance you just let expire for 1.6 million people. let me tell you why. misty demars is a mother of two young boys. she’d been steadily employed since she was a teenager. she put herself through college. she’d never collected unemployment benefits. in may, she and her husband used their life savings to buy their first home. a week later, budget cuts claimed the job she loved. last month, when their unemployment insurance was cut off, she sat down and wrote me a letter – the kind i get every day. “we are the face of the unemployment crisis,” she wrote. “i am not dependent on the government…our country depends on people like us who build careers, contribute to society…care about our neighbors…i am confident that in time i will find a job…i will pay my taxes, and we will raise our children in their own home in the community we love. please give us this chance.” congress, give these hardworking, responsible americans that chance. they need our help, but more important, this country needs them in the game. that’s why i’ve been asking ceos to give more long-term unemployed workers a fair shot at that new job and new chance to support their families; this week, many will come to the white house to make that commitment real. tonight, i ask every business leader in america to join us and to do the same – because we are stronger when america fields a full team. of course, it’s not enough to train today’s workforce. we also have to prepare tomorrow’s workforce, by guaranteeing every child access to a world-class education. estiven rodriguez couldn’t speak a word of english when he moved to new york city at age nine. but last month, thanks to the support of great teachers and an innovative tutoring program, he led a march of his classmates – through a crowd of cheering parents and neighbors – from their high school to the post office, where they mailed off their college applications. and this son of a factory worker just found out he’s going to college this fall. five years ago, we set out to change the odds for all our kids. we worked with lenders to reform student loans, and today, more young people are earning college degrees than ever before. race to the top, with the help of governors from both parties, has helped states raise expectations and performance. teachers and principals in schools from tennessee to washington, d.c. are making big strides in preparing students with skills for the new economy – problem solving, critical thinking, science, technology, engineering, and math. some of this change is hard. it requires everything from more challenging curriculums and more demanding parents to better support for teachers and new ways to measure how well our kids think, not how well they can fill in a bubble on a test. but it’s worth it – and it’s working. the problem is we’re still not reaching enough kids, and we’re not reaching them in time. that has to change. research shows that one of the best investments we can make in a child’s life is high-quality early education. last year, i asked this congress to help states make high-quality pre-k available to every four year-old. as a parent as well as a president, i repeat that request tonight. but in the meantime, thirty states have raised pre-k funding on their own. they know we can’t wait. so just as we worked with states to reform our schools, this year, we’ll invest in new partnerships with states and communities across the country in a race to the top for our youngest children. and as congress decides what it’s going to do, i’m going to pull together a coalition of elected officials, business leaders, and philanthropists willing to help more kids access the highquality pre-k they need. last year, i also pledged to connect 99 percent of our students to high-speed broadband over the next four years. tonight, i can announce that with the support of the fcc and companies like apple, microsoft, sprint, and verizon, we’ve got a down payment to start connecting more than 15,000 schools and twenty million students over the next two years, without adding a dime to the deficit. we’re working to redesign high schools and partner them with colleges and employers that offer the real-world education and hands-on training that can lead directly to a job and career. we’re shaking up our system of higher education to give parents more information, and colleges more incentives to offer better value, so that no middle-class kid is priced out of a college education. we’re offering millions the opportunity to cap their monthly student loan payments to ten percent of their income, and i want to work with congress to see how we can help even more americans who feel trapped by student loan debt. and i’m reaching out to some of america’s leading foundations and corporations on a new initiative to help more young men of color facing tough odds stay on track and reach their full potential. the bottom line is, michelle and i want every child to have the same chance this country gave us. but we know our opportunity agenda won’t be complete – and too many young people entering the workforce today will see the american dream as an empty promise – unless we do more to make sure our economy honors the dignity of work, and hard work pays off for every single american. today, women make up about half our workforce. but they still make 77 cents for every dollar a man earns. that is wrong, and in 2014, it’s an embarrassment. a woman deserves equal pay for equal work. she deserves to have a baby without sacrificing her job. a mother deserves a day off to care for a sick child or sick parent without running into hardship – and you know what, a father does, too. it’s time to do away with workplace policies that belong in a “mad men” episode. this year, let’s all come together – congress, the white house, and businesses from wall street to main street – to give every woman the opportunity she deserves. because i firmly believe when women succeed, america succeeds. now, women hold a majority of lower-wage jobs – but they’re not the only ones stifled by stagnant wages. americans understand that some people will earn more than others, and we don’t resent those who, by virtue of their efforts, achieve incredible success. but americans overwhelmingly agree that no one who works full time should ever have to raise a family in poverty. in the year since i asked this congress to raise the minimum wage, five states have passed laws to raise theirs. many businesses have done it on their own. nick chute is here tonight with his boss, john soranno. john’s an owner of punch pizza in minneapolis, and nick helps make the dough. only now he makes more of it: john just gave his employees a raise, to ten bucks an hour – a decision that eased their financial stress and boosted their morale. tonight, i ask more of america’s business leaders to follow john’s lead and do what you can to raise your employees’ wages. to every mayor, governor, and state legislator in america, i say, you don’t have to wait for congress to act; americans will support you if you take this on. and as a chief executive, i intend to lead by example. profitable corporations like costco see higher wages as the smart way to boost productivity and reduce turnover. we should too. in the coming weeks, i will issue an executive order requiring federal contractors to pay their federally-funded employees a fair wage of at least $10.10 an hour – because if you cook our troops’ meals or wash their dishes, you shouldn’t have to live in poverty. of course, to reach millions more, congress needs to get on board. today, the federal minimum wage is worth about twenty percent less than it was when ronald reagan first stood here. tom harkin and george miller have a bill to fix that by lifting the minimum wage to $10.10. this will help families. it will give businesses customers with more money to spend. it doesn’t involve any new bureaucratic program. so join the rest of the country. say yes. give america a raise. there are other steps we can take to help families make ends meet, and few are more effective at reducing inequality and helping families pull themselves up through hard work than the earned income tax credit. right now, it helps about half of all parents at some point. but i agree with republicans like senator rubio that it doesn’t do enough for single workers who don’t have kids. so let’s work together to strengthen the credit, reward work, and help more americans get ahead. let’s do more to help americans save for retirement. today, most workers don’t have a pension. a social security check often isn’t enough on its own. and while the stock market has doubled over the last five years, that doesn’t help folks who don’t have 401ks. that’s why, tomorrow, i will direct the treasury to create a new way for working americans to start their own retirement savings: myra. it’s a new savings bond that encourages folks to build a nest egg. myra guarantees a decent return with no risk of losing what you put in. and if this congress wants to help, work with me to fix an upside-down tax code that gives big tax breaks to help the wealthy save, but does little to nothing for middle-class americans. offer every american access to an automatic ira on the job, so they can save at work just like everyone in this chamber can. and since the most important investment many families make is their home, send me legislation that protects taxpayers from footing the bill for a housing crisis ever again, and keeps the dream of homeownership alive for future generations of americans. one last point on financial security. for decades, few things exposed hard-working families to economic hardship more than a broken health care system. and in case you haven’t heard, we’re in the process of fixing that. a pre-existing condition used to mean that someone like amanda shelley, a physician assistant and single mom from arizona, couldn’t get health insurance. but on january 1st, she got covered. on january 3rd, she felt a sharp pain. on january 6th, she had emergency surgery. just one week earlier, amanda said, that surgery would’ve meant bankruptcy. that’s what health insurance reform is all about – the peace of mind that if misfortune strikes, you don’t have to lose everything. already, because of the affordable care act, more than three million americans under age 26 have gained coverage under their parents’ plans. more than nine million americans have signed up for private health insurance or medicaid coverage. and here’s another number: zero. because of this law, no american can ever again be dropped or denied coverage for a preexisting condition like asthma, back pain, or cancer. no woman can ever be charged more just because she’s a woman. and we did all this while adding years to medicare’s finances, keeping medicare premiums flat, and lowering prescription costs for millions of seniors. now, i don’t expect to convince my republican friends on the merits of this law. but i know that the american people aren’t interested in refighting old battles. so again, if you have specific plans to cut costs, cover more people, and increase choice – tell america what you’d do differently. let’s see if the numbers add up. but let’s not have another forty-something votes to repeal a law that’s already helping millions of americans like amanda. the first forty were plenty. we got it. we all owe it to the american people to say what we’re for, not just what we’re against. and if you want to know the real impact this law is having, just talk to governor steve beshear of kentucky, who’s here tonight. kentucky’s not the most liberal part of the country, but he’s like a man possessed when it comes to covering his commonwealth’s families. “they are our friends and neighbors,” he said. “they are people we shop and go to church with…farmers out on the tractors…grocery clerks…they are people who go to work every morning praying they don’t get sick. no one deserves to live that way.” steve’s right. that’s why, tonight, i ask every american who knows someone without health insurance to help them get covered by march 31st. moms, get on your kids to sign up. kids, call your mom and walk her through the application. it will give her some peace of mind – plus, she’ll appreciate hearing from you. after all, that’s the spirit that has always moved this nation forward. it’s the spirit of citizenship – the recognition that through hard work and responsibility, we can pursue our individual dreams, but still come together as one american family to make sure the next generation can pursue its dreams as well. citizenship means standing up for everyone’s right to vote. last year, part of the voting rights act was weakened. but conservative republicans and liberal democrats are working together to strengthen it; and the bipartisan commission i appointed last year has offered reforms so that no one has to wait more than a half hour to vote. let’s support these efforts. it should be the power of our vote, not the size of our bank account, that drives our democracy. citizenship means standing up for the lives that gun violence steals from us each day. i have seen the courage of parents, students, pastors, and police officers all over this country who say “we are not afraid,” and i intend to keep trying, with or without congress, to help stop more tragedies from visiting innocent americans in our movie theaters, shopping malls, or schools like sandy hook. citizenship demands a sense of common cause; participation in the hard work of selfgovernment; an obligation to serve to our communities. and i know this chamber agrees that few americans give more to their country than our diplomats and the men and women of the united states armed forces. tonight, because of the extraordinary troops and civilians who risk and lay down their lives to keep us free, the united states is more secure. when i took office, nearly 180,000 americans were serving in iraq and afghanistan. today, all our troops are out of iraq. more than 60,000 of our troops have already come home from afghanistan. with afghan forces now in the lead for their own security, our troops have moved to a support role. together with our allies, we will complete our mission there by the end of this year, and america’s longest war will finally be over. after 2014, we will support a unified afghanistan as it takes responsibility for its own future. if the afghan government signs a security agreement that we have negotiated, a small force of americans could remain in afghanistan with nato allies to carry out two narrow missions: training and assisting afghan forces, and counterterrorism operations to pursue any remnants of al qaeda. for while our relationship with afghanistan will change, one thing will not: our resolve that terrorists do not launch attacks against our country. the fact is, that danger remains. while we have put al qaeda’s core leadership on a path to defeat, the threat has evolved, as al qaeda affiliates and other extremists take root in different parts of the world. in yemen, somalia, iraq, and mali, we have to keep working with partners to disrupt and disable these networks. in syria, we’ll support the opposition that rejects the agenda of terrorist networks. here at home, we’ll keep strengthening our defenses, and combat new threats like cyberattacks. and as we reform our defense budget, we have to keep faith with our men and women in uniform, and invest in the capabilities they need to succeed in future missions. we have to remain vigilant. but i strongly believe our leadership and our security cannot depend on our military alone. as commander-in-chief, i have used force when needed to protect the american people, and i will never hesitate to do so as long as i hold this office. but i will not send our troops into harm’s way unless it’s truly necessary; nor will i allow our sons and daughters to be mired in open-ended conflicts. we must fight the battles that need to be fought, not those that terrorists prefer from us – large-scale deployments that drain our strength and may ultimately feed extremism. so, even as we aggressively pursue terrorist networks – through more targeted efforts and by building the capacity of our foreign partners – america must move off a permanent war footing. that’s why i’ve imposed prudent limits on the use of drones – for we will not be safer if people abroad believe we strike within their countries without regard for the consequence. that’s why, working with this congress, i will reform our surveillance programs – because the vital work of our intelligence community depends on public confidence, here and abroad, that the privacy of ordinary people is not being violated. and with the afghan war ending, this needs to be the year congress lifts the remaining restrictions on detainee transfers and we close the prison at guantanamo bay – because we counter terrorism not just through intelligence and military action, but by remaining true to our constitutional ideals, and setting an example for the rest of the world. you see, in a world of complex threats, our security and leadership depends on all elements of our power – including strong and principled diplomacy. american diplomacy has rallied more than fifty countries to prevent nuclear materials from falling into the wrong hands, and allowed us to reduce our own reliance on cold war stockpiles. american diplomacy, backed by the threat of force, is why syria’s chemical weapons are being eliminated, and we will continue to work with the international community to usher in the future the syrian people deserve – a future free of dictatorship, terror and fear. as we speak, american diplomacy is supporting israelis and palestinians as they engage in difficult but necessary talks to end the conflict there; to achieve dignity and an independent state for palestinians, and lasting peace and security for the state of israel – a jewish state that knows america will always be at their side. and it is american diplomacy, backed by pressure, that has halted the progress of iran’s nuclear program – and rolled parts of that program back – for the very first time in a decade. as we gather here tonight, iran has begun to eliminate its stockpile of higher levels of enriched uranium. it is not installing advanced centrifuges. unprecedented inspections help the world verify, every day, that iran is not building a bomb. and with our allies and partners, we’re engaged in negotiations to see if we can peacefully achieve a goal we all share: preventing iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. these negotiations will be difficult. they may not succeed. we are clear-eyed about iran’s support for terrorist organizations like hezbollah, which threaten our allies; and the mistrust between our nations cannot be wished away. but these negotiations do not rely on trust; any long-term deal we agree to must be based on verifiable action that convinces us and the international community that iran is not building a nuclear bomb. if john f. kennedy and ronald reagan could negotiate with the soviet union, then surely a strong and confident america can negotiate with less powerful adversaries today. the sanctions that we put in place helped make this opportunity possible. but let me be clear: if this congress sends me a new sanctions bill now that threatens to derail these talks, i will veto it. for the sake of our national security, we must give diplomacy a chance to succeed. if iran’s leaders do not seize this opportunity, then i will be the first to call for more sanctions, and stand ready to exercise all options to make sure iran does not build a nuclear weapon. but if iran’s leaders do seize the chance, then iran could take an important step to rejoin the community of nations, and we will have resolved one of the leading security challenges of our time without the risks of war. finally, let’s remember that our leadership is defined not just by our defense against threats, but by the enormous opportunities to do good and promote understanding around the globe – to forge greater cooperation, to expand new markets, to free people from fear and want. and no one is better positioned to take advantage of those opportunities than america. our alliance with europe remains the strongest the world has ever known. from tunisia to burma, we’re supporting those who are willing to do the hard work of building democracy. in ukraine, we stand for the principle that all people have the right to express themselves freely and peacefully, and have a say in their country’s future. across africa, we’re bringing together businesses and governments to double access to electricity and help end extreme poverty. in the americas, we are building new ties of commerce, but we’re also expanding cultural and educational exchanges among young people. and we will continue to focus on the asia-pacific, where we support our allies, shape a future of greater security and prosperity, and extend a hand to those devastated by disaster – as we did in the philippines, when our marines and civilians rushed to aid those battered by a typhoon, and were greeted with words like, “we will never forget your kindness” and “god bless america!” we do these things because they help promote our long-term security. and we do them because we believe in the inherent dignity and equality of every human being, regardless of race or religion, creed or sexual orientation. and next week, the world will see one expression of that commitment – when team usa marches the red, white, and blue into the olympic stadium – and brings home the gold. my fellow americans, no other country in the world does what we do. on every issue, the world turns to us, not simply because of the size of our economy or our military might – but because of the ideals we stand for, and the burdens we bear to advance them. no one knows this better than those who serve in uniform. as this time of war draws to a close, a new generation of heroes returns to civilian life. we’ll keep slashing that backlog so our veterans receive the benefits they’ve earned, and our wounded warriors receive the health care – including the mental health care – that they need. we’ll keep working to help all our veterans translate their skills and leadership into jobs here at home. and we all continue to join forces to honor and support our remarkable military families. let me tell you about one of those families i’ve come to know. i first met cory remsburg, a proud army ranger, at omaha beach on the 65th anniversary of dday. along with some of his fellow rangers, he walked me through the program – a strong, impressive young man, with an easy manner, sharp as a tack. we joked around, and took pictures, and i told him to stay in touch. a few months later, on his tenth deployment, cory was nearly killed by a massive roadside bomb in afghanistan. his comrades found him in a canal, face down, underwater, shrapnel in his brain. for months, he lay in a coma. the next time i met him, in the hospital, he couldn’t speak; he could barely move. over the years, he’s endured dozens of surgeries and procedures, and hours of grueling rehab every day. even now, cory is still blind in one eye. he still struggles on his left side. but slowly, steadily, with the support of caregivers like his dad craig, and the community around him, cory has grown stronger. day by day, he’s learned to speak again and stand again and walk again – and he’s working toward the day when he can serve his country again. “my recovery has not been easy,” he says. “nothing in life that’s worth anything is easy.” cory is here tonight. and like the army he loves, like the america he serves, sergeant first class cory remsburg never gives up, and he does not quit. my fellow americans, men and women like cory remind us that america has never come easy. our freedom, our democracy, has never been easy. sometimes we stumble; we make mistakes; we get frustrated or discouraged. but for more than two hundred years, we have put those things aside and placed our collective shoulder to the wheel of progress – to create and build and expand the possibilities of individual achievement; to free other nations from tyranny and fear; to promote justice, and fairness, and equality under the law, so that the words set to paper by our founders are made real for every citizen. the america we want for our kids – a rising america where honest work is plentiful and communities are strong; where prosperity is widely shared and opportunity for all lets us go as far as our dreams and toil will take us – none of it is easy. but if we work together; if we summon what is best in us, with our feet planted firmly in today but our eyes cast towards tomorrow – i know it’s within our reach. believe it. god bless you, and god bless the united states of america. at the dawn of our republic, a small secret surveillance committee born out of the sons of liberty was established in boston. and the group's members included paul revere. at night, they would patrol the streets, reporting back any signs that the british were preparing raids against america's early patriots.  throughout american history intelligence has helped secure our country and our freedoms. in the civil war union balloons reconnaissance tracked the size of confederate armies by counting the number of campfires.  in world war ii, code breakers gave us incites into japanese war plans. and, when patton marched across europe, intercepted communications helped save the lives of his troops.  after the war, the iron curtain and nuclear weapons only increased the need for sustained intelligence gathering. and so, in the early days of the cold war, president truman created the national security agency, or nsa, to give us insights into the soviet block and provide our leaders with information they needed to confront aggression and avert catastrophe.  throughout this evolution, we benefited from both our constitution and our traditions of limited government. u.s. intelligence agencies were anchored in a system of checks and balances with oversight from elected leaders and protections for ordinary citizens.  meanwhile, totalitarian states like east germany offered a cautionary tale of what could happen when vast, unchecked surveillance turned citizens into informers, and persecuted people for what they said in the privacy of their own homes.  in fact, even the united states proved not to be immune to the abuse of surveillance. in the 1960s, government spied on civil rights leaders and critics of the vietnam war. and partly in response to these revelations, additional laws were established in the 1970s to ensure that our intelligence capabilities could not be misused against our citizens.  in the long, twilight struggle against communism, we had been reminded that the very liberties that we sought to preserve could not be sacrificed at the altar of national security.  after the fall of the soviet union left america without a competing superpower, emerging threats from terrorist groups, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction placed new, and in some ways, more complicated demands on our intelligence agencies.  globalization and the internet made these threats more acute as technology erased borders and empowered individuals to project great violence as well as great good.  moreover, these new threats raised new legal and new policy questions. for while few doubted the legitimacy of spying on hostile states, our framework of laws was not fully adapted to prevent terrorist attacks by individuals acting on their own, or acting in small ideological - ideologically driven groups on behalf of a foreign power.  the horror of september 11th brought all these issue to the fore.  across the political spectrum, americans recognized that we had to adapt to a world in which a bomb could be built in a basement and our electric grid could be shut down by operators an ocean away.  we were shaken by the signs we had missed, leading up to the attacks. how the hijackers had made phone calls to known extremists and travelled to suspicious places.  so we demanded that our intelligence community improved its capabilities and that law enforcement changed practices to focus more on preventing attacks before they happened, and prosecuting terrorists after an attack.  it is hard to overstate the transformation america's intelligence community had to go through after 9/11.  obama: our agencies suddenly needed to do far more than the traditional mission of monitoring hostile powers and gathering information for policy makers, instead they were now asked to identify and target plotters in some of the most remote parts of the world and to anticipate the actions of networks that by their very nature cannot be easily penetrated with spies or informants.  and it is a testimony to the hard work and dedication of the men and women of our intelligence community that over the past decade, we've made enormous strides in fulfilling this mission.  today, new capabilities allow intelligence agencies to track who a terrorist is in contact with and follow the trail of his travel or his funding.  new laws allow information to be collected and shared more quickly and effectively between federal agencies and state and local law enforcement. relationships with foreign intelligence services have expanded, and our capacity to repel cyber-attacks have been strengthened.  and taken together, these efforts have prevented multiple attacks and saved innocent lives, not just here in the united states, but around the globe.  and yet, in our rush to respond to a very real and novel set of threats, the risk of government overreach, the possibility that we lose some of our core liberties in pursuit of security, also became more pronounced.  we saw, in the immediate aftermath of 9/11, our government engaged in enhanced interrogation techniques that contradicted our values.  as a senator, i was critical of several practices, such as warrantless wiretaps. and all too often, new authorities were instituted without adequate public debate.  through a combination of action by the courts, increased congressional oversight, and adjustments by the previous administration, some of the worst excesses that emerged after 9/11 were curbed by the time i took office. but a variety of factors have continued to complicate america's efforts to both defend our nation and uphold our civil liberties.  first, the same technological advances that allow u.s. intelligence agencies to pinpoint an al qaida cell in yemen or an e- mail between two terrorists in the sahel, also mean that many routine communications around the world are within our reach. and at a time when more and more of our lives are digital, that prospect is disquieting for all of us.  second, the combination of increased digital information and powerful supercomputers offers intelligence agencies the possibility of sifting through massive amounts of bulk data to identify patterns or pursue leads that may thwart impending threats. it's a powerful tool. but the government collection and storage of such bulk data also creates a potential for abuse.  third, the legal safeguards that restrict surveillance against u.s. persons without a warrant do not apply to foreign persons overseas. this is not unique to america; few, if any, spy agencies around the world constrain their activities beyond their own borders. and the whole point of intelligence is to obtain information that is not publicly available. but america's capabilities are unique. and the power of new technologies means that there are fewer and fewer technical constraints on what we can do.  that places a special obligation on us to ask tough questions about what we should do.  and, finally, intelligence agencies cannot function without secrecy, which makes their work less subject to public debate. yet, there is an inevitable bias, not only within the intelligence community, but among all of us who are responsible for national security, to collect more information about the world, not less.  so, in the absence of institutional requirements for regular debate – and oversight that is public, as well as private, though classified, the danger of government overreach becomes more acute.  it is particularly true when surveillance technology and our reliance on digital information is evolving much faster than our laws.  for all these reasons, i maintained a healthy skepticism toward our surveillance programs after i became president. i ordered that our programs be reviewed by my national security team and our lawyers, and in some cases i ordered changes in how we did business.  we increased oversight and auditing, including new structures aimed at compliance. improved rules were proposed by the government and approved by the foreign intelligence surveillance court. and we sought to keep congress continually updated on these activities.  what i did not do is stop these programs wholesale, not only because i felt that they made us more secure, but also because nothing in that initial review and nothing that i have learned since, indicated that our intelligence community has sought to violate the law or is cavalier about the civil liberties of their fellow citizens.  to the contrary, in an extraordinarily difficult job, one in which actions are second-guessed, success is unreported, and failure can be catastrophic, the men and women of the intelligence community, including the nsa, consistently follow protocols designed to protect the privacy of ordinary people.  they are not abusing authorities in order to listen to your private phone calls, or read your e-mails. when mistakes are made – which is inevitable in any large and complicated human enterprise – they correct those mistakes. laboring in obscurity, often unable to discuss their work even with family and friends, the men and women at the nsa know that if another 9/11 or massive cyber-attack occurs, they will be asked, by congress and the media, why they failed to connect the dots.  what sustains those who work at nsa - and our other intelligence agencies - through all these pressures is the knowledge that their professionalism and dedication play a central role in the defense of our nation.  now, to say that our intelligence community follows the law, and is staffed by patriots, is not to suggest that i, or others in my administration, felt complacent about the potential impact of these programs.  those of us who hold office in america have a responsibility to our constitution, and while i was confident in the integrity of those in our intelligence community, it was clear to me in observing our intelligence operations on a regular basis that changes in our technological capabilities were raising new questions about the privacy safeguards currently in place.  moreover, after and extended review of our use of drones in the fight against terrorist networks, i believed a fresh examination of our surveillance programs was a necessary next step in our effort to get off the open-ended war footing that we've maintained since 9/11.  and for these reasons, i indicated in a speech at the national defense university last may, that we needed a more robust public discussion about the balance between security and liberty.  of course, what i did not know at the time, is that within weeks of my speech, an avalanche of unauthorized disclosures would spark controversies at home and abroad that have continued to this day.  and give the fact of an open investigation, i'm not gonna dwell on mr. snowden's action or his motivations. i will say that our nation's defense depends, in part, on the fidelity of those entrusted with our nation's secrets.  if any individual who objects to government policy can take it into their own hands to publicly disclose classified information, then we will not be able to keep our people safe, or conduct foreign policy.  moreover, the sensational way in which these disclosures had come out has often shed more heat than light, while revealing methods to our adversaries that could impact our operations in way that we may not fully understand for years to come.  regardless of how we got here, though, the task before us now is greater than simply repairing the damage done to our operations or preventing more disclosures from taking place in the future.  instead, we have to make some important decisions about how to protect ourselves and sustain our leadership in the world, while upholding the civil liberties and privacy protections that our ideals and our constitution require.  we need to do so not only because it is right, but because the challenges posed by threats like terrorism and proliferation and cyber-attacks are not going away anytime soon.  they are going to continue to be a major problem. and for our intelligence community to be effective over the long haul, we must maintain the trust of the american people and people around the world.  this effort will not be completed overnight. and given the pace of technological change, we shouldn't expect this to be the last time america has this debate.  but i want the american people to know that the work has begun. over the last six months, i created an outside review group on intelligence communications technologies to make recommendations for reform.  i consulted with the privacy and civil liberties oversight board, created by congress. i've listened to foreign partners, privacy advocates, and industry leaders.  my administration has spent countless hours considering how to approach intelligence in this era of diffuse threats and technological revolution.  so, before outlining specific changes that i've ordered, let me make a few broad observations that've emerged from this process.  first, everyone who has looked at these problems, including skeptics of existing programs, recognizes that we have real enemies and threats and that intelligence serves a vital role in confronting them.  we cannot prevent terrorist attacks or cyber-threats without some capability to penetrate digital communications, whether it's to unravel a terrorist plot, to intercept malware that targets a stock exchange, to make sure air traffic control systems are not compromised or to ensure that hackers do not empty your bank accounts. we are expected to protect the american people. that requires us to have capabilities in this field.  moreover, we cannot unilaterally disarm our intelligence agencies. there is a reason why blackberrys and iphones are not allowed in the white house situation room.  we know that the intelligence services of other countries, including some who feigned surprise over the snowden disclosures, are constantly probing our government and private sector networks, and accelerating programs to listen to our conversations and intercept our e-mails and compromise our systems. we know that.  meanwhile, a number of countries, including some who have loudly criticized the nsa, privately acknowledge that america has special responsibilities as the world's only superpower, that our intelligence capabilities are critical to meeting these responsibilities and that they themselves have relied on the information we obtain to protect their own people.  second, just as ardent civil libertarians recognize the need for robust intelligence capabilities, those with responsibilities for our national security readily acknowledge the potential for abuse as intelligence capabilities advance and more and more private information is digitized.  after all, the folks at nsa and other intelligence agencies are our neighbors. they're our friends and family. they've got electronic bank and medical records like everybody else. they have kids on facebook and instagram, and they know, more than most of us, the vulnerabilities to privacy that exist in a world where transactions are recorded and e-mail and text messages are stored and even our movements can be tracked through the gps on our phones.  third, there was a recognition by all who participated in these reviews that the challenges to our privacy do not come from government alone. corporations of all shapes and sizes track what you buy, store and analyze our data, and use it for commercial purposes. that's how those targeted ads pop up on your computer or smartphone periodically. but all of us understand that the standards for government surveillance must be higher.  given the unique power of the state, it is not enough for leaders to say, trust us, we won't abuse the data we collect for history has too many examples when that trust has been breached. our system of government is built on the premise that our liberty cannot depend on the good intentions of those in power. it depends upon the law to constrain those in power.  i make these observations to underscore that the basic values of most americans when it comes to questions of surveillance and privacy converge a lot more than the crude characterizations that have emerged over the last several months.  those who are troubled by our existing programs are not interested in a repeating the tragedy 9/11, and those who defend these programs are not dismissive of civil liberties. the challenge is getting the details right, and that's not simple.  in fact, during the course of our review, i've often reminded myself i would not be where i am today were it not for the courage of dissidents like dr. king, who were spied upon by their own government.  and as president, a president who looks at intelligence every morning, i also can't help but be reminded that america must be vigilant in the face of threats.  now fortunately, by focusing on facts and specifics rather than speculation and hypotheticals, this review process has given me, and hopefully the american people, some clear direction for change.  and today, i can announce a series of concrete and substantial reforms that my administration attends to adopt administratively, or will seek to codify with congress.  first, i have approve a new presidential directive for our signals intelligence activities, both at home, and abroad. this guidance will strengthen executive branch oversight of our intelligence activities.  it will ensure that we take into account our security requirements, but also our alliances, our trade and investment relationships, including the concerns of american companies, and our commitment to privacy and basic liberties.  and we will review decisions about intelligence priorities and sensitive targets on an annual basis so that our actions are regularly scrutinized by my senior national security team.  second, we will reform programs and procedures in place to provide greater transparency to our surveillance activities and fortify the safeguards that protect the privacy of u.s. persons.  since we began this review, including information being released today, we've declassified over 40 opinions and orders of the foreign intelligence surveillance court, which provides judicial review of some of our most sensitive intelligence activities, including the section 702 program, targeting foreign individuals overseas and the section 215, telephone metadata program.  and going forward, i am directing the director of national intelligence, in consultation with the attorney general to annually review, for the purposes of declassification, and future opinions of the court with broad privacy implications, and to report to me and to congress on these efforts.  to ensure that the court hears a broader range of privacy perspectives, i'm also calling on congress to authorize the establishment of a panel of advocates from outside government to provide an independent voice in significant cases before the foreign intelligence surveillance court.  third, we will provide additional protections for activities conducted under section 702 which allows the government to intercept the communications of foreign targets overseas who have information that's important for our national security.  specifically, i'm asking the attorney general and dni to institute reforms that place additional restrictions on government's ability to retain, search and use, in criminal cases, communications between americans and foreign citizens, incidentally collected under section 702.  fourth, in investigating threats, the fbi also relies on what's called, national security letters, which can require companies to provide specific and limited information to the government without disclosing the order to the subject of the investigation.  now, these are cases in which it's important that the subject of the investigation, such as a possible terrorist or spy, isn't tipped off.  but we can, and should, be more transparent in how government uses this authority. i've therefore directed the attorney general to amend how we use national security letters so this secrecy will not be indefinite, so that it will terminate within a fixed time unless the government demonstrates a real need for further secrecy.  we will also enable communications providers to make public more information than ever before about the orders that they have received to provide data to the government.  this brings me to program that has generated the most controversy these past few months, the bulk collection of telephone records under section 215.  let me repeat what i said when this story first broke. this program does not involve the content of phone calls or the names of people making calls. instead, it provides a record of phone numbers, and the times and lengths of calls, metadata that can be queried if and when we have a reasonable suspicion that a particular number is linked to a terrorist organization.  why is this necessary? the program grew out of a desire to address a gap identified after 9/11. one of the 9/11 hijackers, khalid al-mihdhar, made a phone call from san diego to a known al qaida safe house in yemen. nsa saw that call, but it could not see that the call was coming from an individual already in the united states.  the telephone metadata program under section 215 was designed to map the communications of terrorists, so we can see who they may be in contact with as quickly as possible. this capability could also prove valuable in a crisis.  for example, if a bomb goes off in one of our cities and law enforcement is racing to determine whether a network is poised to conduct additional attacks, time is of the essence. being able to quickly review telephone connections to assess whether a network exists is critical to that effort.  in sum, the program does not involve the nsa examining the phone records of ordinary americans. rather, it consolidates these records into a database that the government can query if it has a specific lead, a consolidation of phone records that the companies already retain for business purposes.  the review group turned up no indication that this database has been intentionally abused. and i believe it is important that the capability that this program is designed to meet is preserved.  having said that, i believe critics are right to point out that without proper safeguards, this type of program could be used to yield more information about our private lives, and open the door to more intrusive, bulk collection programs in the future.  they're also rightly point out that, although the telephone bulk collection program was subject to oversight by the foreign intelligence surveillance court, and has been reauthorized repeatedly by congress, it has never been subject to vigorous public debate.  for all these reasons, i believe we need a new approach. i am therefore ordering a transition that will end the section 215 bulk metadata program as it currently exists and establish a mechanism that preserves the capabilities we need without the government holding this bulk metadata.  this will not be simple. the review group recommended that our current approach be replaced by one in which the providers, or a third party, retain the bulk records, with government accessing information as needed.  both of these options pose difficult problems. relying solely on the records of multiple providers, for example, could require companies to alter their procedures in ways that raise new privacy concerns.  on the other hand, any third party maintaining a single, consolidated database would be carrying out what's essentially a government function, but with more expense, more legal ambiguity, potentially less accountability, all of which would have a doubtful impact on increasing public confidence that their privacy is being protected.  during the review process, some suggested that we may also be able to preserve the capabilities we need through a combination of existing authorities that are information-sharing and recent technological advances.  but more work needs to be done to determine exactly how this system might work.  because of the challenges involved, i've ordered that the transition away from the existing program will proceed in two steps.  effective immediately, we will only pursue phone calls that are two steps removed from a number associated with a terrorist organization, instead of the current three.  and i have directed the attorney general to work with the foreign intelligence surveillance court so that during this transition period, the database can be queried only after a judicial finding or in the case of a true emergency.  next, step two, i've instructed the intelligence community and attorney general to use this transition period to develop options for a new approach that can match the capabilities and fill the gaps that the section 215 program was designed to address without the government holding this metadata itself.  they will report back to me with options for alternative approaches before the program comes up for reauthorization on march 28th. and during this period, i will consult with the relevant committees in congress to seek their views and then seek congressional authorization for the new program as needed.  now, the reforms i'm proposing today should give the american people greater confidence that their rights are being protected, even as our intelligence and law enforcement agencies maintain the tools they need to keep us safe.  now, i recognize that there are additional issues that require further debate. for example, some who participated in our review, as well as some members of congress, would like to see more sweeping reforms to the use of national security letters, so we have to go to a judge each time before issuing these requests.  here, i have concerns that we should not set a standard for terrorism investigations that is higher than those involved in investigating an ordinary crime. but i agree that greater oversight on the use of these letters may be appropriate, and i'm prepared to work with congress on this issue.  there are also those who would like to see different changes to the fisa court than the ones i've proposed. on all these issues i'm open to working with congress to ensure that we build a broad consensus for how to move forward.  and i'm confident that we can shape an approach that meets our security needs while upholding the civil liberties of every american.  let me now turn to the separate set of concerns that have been raised overseas and focus on america's approach to intelligence collection abroad. as i've indicated, the united states has unique responsibilities when it comes to intelligence collection. our capabilities help protect not only our nation but our friends and our allies as well.  but our efforts will only be effective if ordinary citizens in other countries have confidence that the united states respects their privacy, too. and the leaders of our close friends and allies deserve to know that if i want to know what they think about an issue, i'll pick up the phone and call them, rather than turning to surveillance.  in other words, just as we balance security and privacy at home, our global leadership demands that we balance our security requirements against our need to maintain the trust and cooperation among people and leaders around the world.  for that reason, the new presidential directive that i've issued today will clearly prescribe what we do and do not do when it comes to our overseas surveillance.  to begin with, the directive makes clear that the united states only uses signals intelligence for legitimate national security purposes and not for the purpose of indiscriminately reviewing the e- mails or phone calls of ordinary folks.  i've also made it clear that the united states does not collect intelligence to suppress criticism or dissent, nor do we collect intelligence to disadvantage people on the basis of their ethnicity, or race, or gender, or sexual orientation or religious beliefs. we do not collect intelligence to provide a competitive advantage to u.s. companies, or u.s. commercial sectors.  and in terms of our bulk collection of signals intelligence, u.s. intelligence agencies will only use such data to meet specific security requirements: counter-intelligence, counter-terrorism, counter-proliferation, cyber-security, force protection for our troops and allies and combating transnational crime including sanctions evasion.  in this directive i have taken the unprecedented step of extending certain protections that we have for the american people to people overseas. i have directed the dni, in consultation with the attorney general, to develop these safeguards, which will limit the duration that we can hold personal information, while also restricting the use of this information.  the bottom line is that people around the world - regardless of their nationality - should know that the united states is not spying on ordinary people who don't threaten our national security, and that we take their privacy concerns into account in our policies and procedures. this applies to foreign leaders as well.  given the understandable attention that this issue has received, i have made clear to the intelligence community that – unless there is a compelling national security purpose - we will not monitor the communications of heads of state, and government, of our close friends and allies.  and i've instructed my national security team, as well as the intelligence community, to work with foreign counterparts to deepen our coordination and cooperation in ways that rebuild trust, going forward.  now, let me be clear, our intelligence agencies will continue to gather information about the intentions of governments, as opposed to ordinary citizens, around the world, in the same way that the intelligence services of every other nation does.  we will not apologize, simply, because our services may be more effective. but, heads of state and government, with who we work closely, and on whose cooperation we depend, should feel confident that we are treating them as real partners.  and the changes i've ordered, do just that.  finally, to make sure that we follow through on all these reforms, i'm making some important changes to how our government is organized.  the state department will designate a senior officer to coordinate our diplomacy on issues related to technology and signals intelligence. we will appoint a senior official at the white house to implement the new privacy safeguards that i've announced today.  i will devote the resources to centralize and improve the process we use to handle foreign requests for legal assistance, keeping our high standards for privacy, while helping foreign partners fight crime and terrorism.  i've also asked my counselor, john podesta, to lead a comprehensive review of big data and privacy. and this group will consist of government officials, who along with the president's council of advisors on science and technology, will reach out to privacy experts, technologists and business leaders and look how the challenges inherent in big data are being confronted by both the public and private sectors, whether we can forge international norms on how to manage this data, and how we can continue to promote the free-flow of information in ways that are consistent with both privacy and security.  for ultimately, what's at stake in this debate goes far beyond a few months of headlines, or passing tensions in our foreign policy. when you cut through the noise, what's really at stake is how we remain true to who we are in a world that's remaking itself at dizzying speed.  whether it's the ability of individuals to access information that would have once filled every great library in every country in the world, or to forge bonds with people on the other side of the globe, technology is remaking what is possible for individuals and for institutions and for the international order.  so all the reforms that i have announced will point us in a new direction. i am mindful that more work will be needed in the future. one thing i am certain of, this debate will make us stronger.  and i also know that in this time of change, the united states of america will have to lead.  it may seem sometimes that america is being held to a different standard, and i'll admit that the readiness of some to assume the worst motives by our government can be frustrating.  no one expects china to have an open debate about their surveillance programs, or russia to take privacy concerns of citizens in other places into account.  but let's remember, we are held to a different standard precisely because we have been at the forefront of defending personal privacy and human dignity.  as the nation that developed the internet, the world expects us to ensure that the digital revolution works as a tool for individual empowerment, not government control.  having faced down the dangers of totalitarianism and fascism and communism, the world expects us to stand up for the principle that every person has the right to think and write and form relationships freely, because individual freedom is the wellspring of human progress.  those values make us who we are. and because of the strength of our own democracy, we should not shy away from high expectations.  for more than two centuries, our constitution has weathered every type of change because we've been willing to defend it and because we've been willing to question the actions that have been taken in its defense.  today is no different. i believe we can meet high expectations. together, let us chart a way forward that secures the life of our nation, while preserving the liberties that make our nation worth fighting for.  thank you. god bless you. may god bless the united states of america. it is hard to eulogize any man - to capture in words not just the facts and the dates that make a life, but the essential truth of a person - their private joys and sorrows; the quiet moments and unique qualities that illuminate someone’s soul. how much harder to do so for a giant of history, who moved a nation toward justice, and in the process moved billions around the world.  born during world war i, far from the corridors of power, a boy raised herding cattle and tutored by the elders of his thembu tribe, madiba would emerge as the last great liberator of the 20th century. like gandhi, he would lead a resistance movement - a movement that at its start had little prospect for success. like dr. king, he would give potent voice to the claims of the oppressed and the moral necessity of racial justice. he would endure a brutal imprisonment that began in the time of kennedy and khrushchev, and reached the final days of the cold war. emerging from prison, without the force of arms, he would - like abraham lincoln - hold his country together when it threatened to break apart. and like america’s founding fathers, he would erect a constitutional order to preserve freedom for future generations - a commitment to democracy and rule of law ratified not only by his election, but by his willingness to step down from power after only one term.  given the sweep of his life, the scope of his accomplishments, the adoration that he so rightly earned, it’s tempting i think to remember nelson mandela as an icon, smiling and serene, detached from the tawdry affairs of lesser men. but madiba himself strongly resisted such a lifeless portrait. instead, madiba insisted on sharing with us his doubts and his fears; his miscalculations along with his victories. “i am not a saint,” he said, “unless you think of a saint as a sinner who keeps on trying.”  it was precisely because he could admit to imperfection - because he could be so full of good humor, even mischief, despite the heavy burdens he carried - that we loved him so. he was not a bust made of marble; he was a man of flesh and blood - a son and a husband, a father and a friend. and that’s why we learned so much from him, and that’s why we can learn from him still. for nothing he achieved was inevitable. in the arc of his life, we see a man who earned his place in history through struggle and shrewdness, and persistence and faith. he tells us what is possible not just in the pages of history books, but in our own lives as well.  mandela showed us the power of action; of taking risks on behalf of our ideals. perhaps madiba was right that he inherited, “a proud rebelliousness, a stubborn sense of fairness” from his father. and we know he shared with millions of black and colored south africans the anger born of, “a thousand slights, a thousand indignities, a thousand unremembered moments…a desire to fight the system that imprisoned my people,” he said.  but like other early giants of the anc - the sisulus and tambos - madiba disciplined his anger and channeled his desire to fight into organization, and platforms, and strategies for action, so men and women could stand up for their god-given dignity. moreover, he accepted the consequences of his actions, knowing that standing up to powerful interests and injustice carries a price. “i have fought against white domination and i have fought against black domination. i’ve cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony and [with] equal opportunities. it is an ideal which i hope to live for and to achieve. but if needs be, it is an ideal for which i am prepared to die.”  mandela taught us the power of action, but he also taught us the power of ideas; the importance of reason and arguments; the need to study not only those who you agree with, but also those who you don’t agree with. he understood that ideas cannot be contained by prison walls, or extinguished by a sniper’s bullet. he turned his trial into an indictment of apartheid because of his eloquence and his passion, but also because of his training as an advocate. he used decades in prison to sharpen his arguments, but also to spread his thirst for knowledge to others in the movement. and he learned the language and the customs of his oppressor so that one day he might better convey to them how their own freedom depend upon his.  mandela demonstrated that action and ideas are not enough. no matter how right, they must be chiseled into law and institutions. he was practical, testing his beliefs against the hard surface of circumstance and history. on core principles he was unyielding, which is why he could rebuff offers of unconditional release, reminding the apartheid regime that “prisoners cannot enter into contracts.”  but as he showed in painstaking negotiations to transfer power and draft new laws, he was not afraid to compromise for the sake of a larger goal. and because he was not only a leader of a movement but a skillful politician, the constitution that emerged was worthy of this multiracial democracy, true to his vision of laws that protect minority as well as majority rights, and the precious freedoms of every south african.  and finally, mandela understood the ties that bind the human spirit. there is a word in south africa - ubuntu - a word that captures mandela’s greatest gift: his recognition that we are all bound together in ways that are invisible to the eye; that there is a oneness to humanity; that we achieve ourselves by sharing ourselves with others, and caring for those around us.  we can never know how much of this sense was innate in him, or how much was shaped in a dark and solitary cell. but we remember the gestures, large and small - introducing his jailers as honored guests at his inauguration; taking a pitch in a springbok uniform; turning his family’s heartbreak into a call to confront hiv/aids - that revealed the depth of his empathy and his understanding. he not only embodied ubuntu, he taught millions to find that truth within themselves.  it took a man like madiba to free not just the prisoner, but the jailer as well - to show that you must trust others so that they may trust you; to teach that reconciliation is not a matter of ignoring a cruel past, but a means of confronting it with inclusion and generosity and truth. he changed laws, but he also changed hearts.  for the people of south africa, for those he inspired around the globe, madiba’s passing is rightly a time of mourning, and a time to celebrate a heroic life. but i believe it should also prompt in each of us a time for self-reflection. with honesty, regardless of our station or our circumstance, we must ask: how well have i applied his lessons in my own life? it’s a question i ask myself, as a man and as a president.  we know that, like south africa, the united states had to overcome centuries of racial subjugation. as was true here, it took sacrifice - the sacrifice of countless people, known and unknown, to see the dawn of a new day. michelle and i are beneficiaries of that struggle. but in america, and in south africa, and in countries all around the globe, we cannot allow our progress to cloud the fact that our work is not yet done.  the struggles that follow the victory of formal equality or universal franchise may not be as filled with drama and moral clarity as those that came before, but they are no less important. for around the world today, we still see children suffering from hunger and disease. we still see run-down schools. we still see young people without prospects for the future. around the world today, men and women are still imprisoned for their political beliefs, and are still persecuted for what they look like, and how they worship, and who they love. that is happening today.  and so we, too, must act on behalf of justice. we, too, must act on behalf of peace. there are too many people who happily embrace madiba’s legacy of racial reconciliation, but passionately resist even modest reforms that would challenge chronic poverty and growing inequality. there are too many leaders who claim solidarity with madiba’s struggle for freedom, but do not tolerate dissent from their own people. and there are too many of us on the sidelines, comfortable in complacency or cynicism when our voices must be heard.  the questions we face today - how to promote equality and justice; how to uphold freedom and human rights; how to end conflict and sectarian war - these things do not have easy answers. but there were no easy answers in front of that child born in world war i. nelson mandela reminds us that it always seems impossible until it is done. south africa shows that is true. south africa shows we can change, that we can choose a world defined not by our differences, but by our common hopes. we can choose a world defined not by conflict, but by peace and justice and opportunity.  we will never see the likes of nelson mandela again. but let me say to the young people of africa and the young people around the world - you, too, can make his life’s work your own. over 30 years ago, while still a student, i learned of nelson mandela and the struggles taking place in this beautiful land, and it stirred something in me. it woke me up to my responsibilities to others and to myself, and it set me on an improbable journey that finds me here today. and while i will always fall short of madiba’s example, he makes me want to be a better man. he speaks to what’s best inside us.  after this great liberator is laid to rest, and when we have returned to our cities and villages and rejoined our daily routines, let us search for his strength. let us search for his largeness of spirit somewhere inside of ourselves. and when the night grows dark, when injustice weighs heavy on our hearts, when our best-laid plans seem beyond our reach, let us think of madiba and the words that brought him comfort within the four walls of his cell: “it matters not how strait the gate, how charged with punishments the scroll, i am the master of my fate: i am the captain of my soul.”  what a magnificent soul it was. we will miss him deeply. may god bless the memory of nelson mandela. may god bless the people of south africa. to the king family, who have sacrificed and inspired so much; to president clinton; president carter; vice president biden and jill; fellow americans. five decades ago today, americans came to this honored place to lay claim to a promise made at our founding: "we hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness." in 1963, almost 200 years after those words were set to paper, a full century after a great war was fought and emancipation proclaimed, that promise -- those truths -- remained unmet. and so they came by the thousands from every corner of our country, men and women, young and old, blacks who longed for freedom and whites who could no longer accept freedom for themselves while witnessing the subjugation of others. across the land, congregations sent them off with food and with prayer. in the middle of the night, entire blocks of harlem came out to wish them well. with the few dollars they scrimped from their labor, some bought tickets and boarded buses, even if they couldn't always sit where they wanted to sit. those with less money hitchhiked or walked. they were seamstresses and steelworkers, students and teachers, maids and pullman porters. they shared simple meals and bunked together on floors. and then, on a hot summer day, they assembled here, in our nation's capital, under the shadow of the great emancipator -- to offer testimony of injustice, to petition their government for redress, and to awaken america's long-slumbering conscience. we rightly and best remember dr. king's soaring oratory that day, how he gave mighty voice to the quiet hopes of millions; how he offered a salvation path for oppressed and oppressors alike. his words belong to the ages, possessing a power and prophecy unmatched in our time. but we would do well to recall that day itself also belonged to those ordinary people whose names never appeared in the history books, never got on tv. many had gone to segregated schools and sat at segregated lunch counters. they lived in towns where they couldn't vote and cities where their votes didn't matter. they were couples in love who couldn't marry, soldiers who fought for freedom abroad that they found denied to them at home. they had seen loved ones beaten, and children fire-hosed, and they had every reason to lash out in anger, or resign themselves to a bitter fate. and yet they chose a different path. in the face of hatred, they prayed for their tormentors. in the face of violence, they stood up and sat in, with the moral force of nonviolence. willingly, they went to jail to protest unjust laws, their cells swelling with the sound of freedom songs. a lifetime of indignities had taught them that no man can take away the dignity and grace that god grants us. they had learned through hard experience what frederick douglass once taught -- that freedom is not given, it must be won, through struggle and discipline, persistence and faith. that was the spirit they brought here that day. that was the spirit young people like john lewis brought to that day. that was the spirit that they carried with them, like a torch, back to their cities and their neighborhoods. that steady flame of conscience and courage that would sustain them through the campaigns to come -- through boycotts and voter registration drives and smaller marches far from the spotlight; through the loss of four little girls in birmingham, and the carnage of the edmund pettus bridge, and the agony of dallas and california and memphis. through setbacks and heartbreaks and gnawing doubt, that flame of justice flickered; it never died. and because they kept marching, america changed. because they marched, a civil rights law was passed. because they marched, a voting rights law was signed. because they marched, doors of opportunity and education swung open so their daughters and sons could finally imagine a life for themselves beyond washing somebody else's laundry or shining somebody else's shoes. because they marched, city councils changed and state legislatures changed, and congress changed, and, yes, eventually, the white house changed. because they marched, america became more free and more fair -- not just for african americans, but for women and latinos, asians and native americans; for catholics, jews, and muslims; for gays, for americans with a disability. america changed for you and for me. [a]nd the entire world drew strength from that example, whether the young people who watched from the other side of an iron curtain and would eventually tear down that wall, or the young people inside south africa who would eventually end the scourge of apartheid. those are the victories they won, with iron wills and hope in their hearts. that is the transformation that they wrought, with each step of their well-worn shoes. that's the debt that i and millions of americans owe those maids, those laborers, those porters, those secretaries; folks who could have run a company maybe if they had ever had a chance; those white students who put themselves in harm's way, even though they didn't have to; those japanese americans who recalled their own internment; those jewish americans who had survived the holocaust; people who could have given up and given in, but kept on keeping on, knowing that "weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning." on the battlefield of justice, men and women without rank or wealth or title or fame would liberate us all in ways that our children now take for granted, as people of all colors and creeds live together and learn together and walk together, and fight alongside one another, and love one another, and judge one another by the content of our character in this greatest nation on earth. to dismiss the magnitude of this progress -- to suggest, as some sometimes do, that little has changed -- that dishonors the courage and the sacrifice of those who paid the price to march in those years. medgar evers, james chaney, andrew goodman, michael schwerner, martin luther king jr. -- they did not die in vain. their victory was great. but we would dishonor those heroes as well to suggest that the work of this nation is somehow complete. the arc of the moral universe may bend towards justice, but it doesn't bend on its own. to secure the gains this country has made requires constant vigilance, not complacency. whether by challenging those who erect new barriers to the vote, or ensuring that the scales of justice work equally for all, and the criminal justice system is not simply a pipeline from underfunded schools to overcrowded jails, it requires vigilance. and we'll suffer the occasional setback. but we will win these fights. this country has changed too much. people of goodwill, regardless of party, are too plentiful for those with ill will to change history's currents. in some ways, though, the securing of civil rights, voting rights, the eradication of legalized discrimination -- the very significance of these victories may have obscured a second goal of the march. for the men and women who gathered 50 years ago were not there in search of some abstract ideal. they were there seeking jobs as well as justice -- not just the absence of oppression but the presence of economic opportunity. for what does it profit a man, dr. king would ask, to sit at an integrated lunch counter if he can't afford the meal? this idea -- that one's liberty is linked to one's livelihood; that the pursuit of happiness requires the dignity of work, the skills to find work, decent pay, some measure of material security -- this idea was not new. lincoln himself understood the declaration of independence in such terms -- as a promise that in due time, "the weights should be lifted from the shoulders of all men, and that all should have an equal chance." and dr. king explained that the goals of african americans were identical to working people of all races: "decent wages, fair working conditions, livable housing, old-age security, health and welfare measures, conditions in which families can grow, have education for their children, and respect in the community." what king was describing has been the dream of every american. it's what's lured for centuries new arrivals to our shores. and it's along this second dimension -- of economic opportunity, the chance through honest toil to advance one's station in life -- where the goals of 50 years ago have fallen most short. yes, there have been examples of success within black america that would have been unimaginable a half century ago. but as has already been noted, black unemployment has remained almost twice as high as white unemployment, latino unemployment close behind. the gap in wealth between races has not lessened, it's grown. and as president clinton indicated, the position of all working americans, regardless of color, has eroded, making the dream dr. king described even more elusive. for over a decade, working americans of all races have seen their wages and incomes stagnate, even as corporate profits soar, even as the pay of a fortunate few explodes. inequality has steadily risen over the decades. upward mobility has become harder. in too many communities across this country, in cities and suburbs and rural hamlets, the shadow of poverty casts a pall over our youth, their lives a fortress of substandard schools and diminished prospects, inadequate health care and perennial violence. and so as we mark this anniversary, we must remind ourselves that the measure of progress for those who marched 50 years ago was not merely how many blacks could join the ranks of millionaires. it was whether this country would admit all people who are willing to work hard regardless of race into the ranks of a middle-class life. the test was not, and never has been, whether the doors of opportunity are cracked a bit wider for a few. it was whether our economic system provides a fair shot for the many -- for the black custodian and the white steelworker, the immigrant dishwasher and the native american veteran. to win that battle, to answer that call -- this remains our great unfinished business. we shouldn't fool ourselves. the task will not be easy. since 1963, the economy has changed. the twin forces of technology and global competition have subtracted those jobs that once provided a foothold into the middle class -- reduced the bargaining power of american workers. and our politics has suffered. entrenched interests, those who benefit from an unjust status quo, resisted any government efforts to give working families a fair deal -- marshaling an army of lobbyists and opinion makers to argue that minimum wage increases or stronger labor laws or taxes on the wealthy who could afford it just to fund crumbling schools, that all these things violated sound economic principles. we'd be told that growing inequality was a price for a growing economy, a measure of this free market; that greed was good and compassion ineffective, and those without jobs or health care had only themselves to blame. and then, there were those elected officials who found it useful to practice the old politics of division, doing their best to convince middle-class americans of a great untruth -- that government was somehow itself to blame for their growing economic insecurity; that distant bureaucrats were taking their hard-earned dollars to benefit the welfare cheat or the illegal immigrant. and then, if we're honest with ourselves, we'll admit that during the course of 50 years, there were times when some of us claiming to push for change lost our way. the anguish of assassinations set off self-defeating riots. legitimate grievances against police brutality tipped into excuse-making for criminal behavior. racial politics could cut both ways, as the transformative message of unity and brotherhood was drowned out by the language of recrimination. and what had once been a call for equality of opportunity, the chance for all americans to work hard and get ahead was too often framed as a mere desire for government support -- as if we had no agency in our own liberation, as if poverty was an excuse for not raising your child, and the bigotry of others was reason to give up on yourself. all of that history is how progress stalled. that's how hope was diverted. it's how our country remained divided. but the good news is, just as was true in 1963, we now have a choice. we can continue down our current path, in which the gears of this great democracy grind to a halt and our children accept a life of lower expectations; where politics is a zero-sum game where a few do very well while struggling families of every race fight over a shrinking economic pie -- that's one path. or we can have the courage to change. the march on washington teaches us that we are not trapped by the mistakes of history; that we are masters of our fate. but it also teaches us that the promise of this nation will only be kept when we work together. we'll have to reignite the embers of empathy and fellow feeling, the coalition of conscience that found expression in this place 50 years ago. and i believe that spirit is there, that truth force inside each of us. i see it when a white mother recognizes her own daughter in the face of a poor black child. i see it when the black youth thinks of his own grandfather in the dignified steps of an elderly white man. it's there when the native-born recognizing that striving spirit of the new immigrant; when the interracial couple connects the pain of a gay couple who are discriminated against and understands it as their own. that's where courage comes from -- when we turn not from each other, or on each other, but towards one another, and we find that we do not walk alone. that's where courage comes from. and with that courage, we can stand together for good jobs and just wages. with that courage, we can stand together for the right to health care in the richest nation on earth for every person. with that courage, we can stand together for the right of every child, from the corners of anacostia to the hills of appalachia, to get an education that stirs the mind and captures the spirit, and prepares them for the world that awaits them. with that courage, we can feed the hungry, and house the homeless, and transform bleak wastelands of poverty into fields of commerce and promise. america, i know the road will be long, but i know we can get there. yes, we will stumble, but i know we'll get back up. that's how a movement happens. that's how history bends. that's how when somebody is faint of heart, somebody else brings them along and says, come on, we're marching. there's a reason why so many who marched that day, and in the days to come, were young -- for the young are unconstrained by habits of fear, unconstrained by the conventions of what is. they dared to dream differently, to imagine something better. and i am convinced that same imagination, the same hunger of purpose stirs in this generation. we might not face the same dangers of 1963, but the fierce urgency of now remains. we may never duplicate the swelling crowds and dazzling procession of that day so long ago -- no one can match king's brilliance -- but the same flame that lit the heart of all who are willing to take a first step for justice, i know that flame remains. that tireless teacher who gets to class early and stays late and dips into her own pocket to buy supplies because she believes that every child is her charge -- she's marching. that successful businessman who doesn't have to but pays his workers a fair wage and then offers a shot to a man, maybe an ex-con who is down on his luck -- he's marching. the mother who pours her love into her daughter so that she grows up with the confidence to walk through the same door as anybody's son -- she's marching. the father who realizes the most important job he'll ever have is raising his boy right, even if he didn't have a father -- especially if he didn't have a father at home -- he's marching. the battle-scarred veterans who devote themselves not only to helping their fellow warriors stand again, and walk again, and run again, but to keep serving their country when they come home -- they are marching. everyone who realizes what those glorious patriots knew on that day -- that change does not come from washington, but to washington; that change has always been built on our willingness, we the people, to take on the mantle of citizenship -- you are marching. and that's the lesson of our past. that's the promise of tomorrow -- that in the face of impossible odds, people who love their country can change it. that when millions of americans of every race and every region, every faith and every station, can join together in a spirit of brotherhood, then those mountains will be made low, and those rough places will be made plain, and those crooked places, they straighten out towards grace, and we will vindicate the faith of those who sacrificed so much and live up to the true meaning of our creed, as one nation, under god, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. thank you, everybody. please have a seat. good afternoon, everybody. let me begin by thanking our vice president, joe biden, for your dedication, joe, to this issue, for bringing so many different voices to the table. because while reducing gun violence is a complicated challenge, protecting our children from harm shouldn't be a divisive one.  over the month since the tragedy in newtown, we've heard from so many, and, obviously, none have affected us more than the families of those gorgeous children and their teachers and guardians who were lost. and so we're grateful to all of you for taking the time to be here, and recognizing that we honor their memories in part by doing everything we can to prevent this from happening again.  but we also heard from some unexpected people. in particular, i started getting a lot of letters from kids. four of them are here today - grant fritz, julia stokes, hinna zeejah, and teja goode. they're pretty representative of some of the messages that i got. these are some pretty smart letters from some pretty smart young people.  hinna, a third-grader - you can go ahead and wave, hinna. that's you - hinna wrote, "i feel terrible for the parents who lost their children…i love my country and [i] want everybody to be happy and safe."  and then, grant - go ahead and wave, grant. grant said, "i think there should be some changes. we should learn from what happened at sandy hook…i feel really bad."  and then, julia said - julia, where are you? there you go - "i'm not scared for my safety, i'm scared for others. i have four brothers and sisters and i know i would not be able to bear the thought of losing any of them."  these are our kids. this is what they're thinking about. and so what we should be thinking about is our responsibility to care for them, and shield them from harm, and give them the tools they need to grow up and do everything that they're capable of doing - not just to pursue their own dreams, but to help build this country. this is our first task as a society, keeping our children safe. this is how we will be judged. and their voices should compel us to change.  and that's why, last month, i asked joe to lead an effort, along with members of my cabinet, to come up with some concrete steps we can take right now to keep our children safe, to help prevent mass shootings, to reduce the broader epidemic of gun violence in this country.  and we can't put this off any longer. just last thursday, as tv networks were covering one of joe's meetings on this topic, news broke of another school shooting, this one in california. in the month since 20 precious children and six brave adults were violently taken from us at sandy hook elementary, more than 900 of our fellow americans have reportedly died at the end of a gun - 900 in the past month. and every day we wait, that number will keep growing.  so i'm putting forward a specific set of proposals based on the work of joe's task force. and in the days ahead, i intend to use whatever weight this office holds to make them a reality. because while there is no law or set of laws that can prevent every senseless act of violence completely, no piece of legislation that will prevent every tragedy, every act of evil, if there is even one thing we can do to reduce this violence, if there is even one life that can be saved, then we've got an obligation to try.  and i'm going to do my part. as soon as i'm finished speaking here, i will sit at that desk and i will sign a directive giving law enforcement, schools, mental health professionals and the public health community some of the tools they need to help reduce gun violence.  we will make it easier to keep guns out of the hands of criminals by strengthening the background check system. we will help schools hire more resource officers if they want them and develop emergency preparedness plans. we will make sure mental health professionals know their options for reporting threats of violence - even as we acknowledge that someone with a mental illness is far more likely to be a victim of violent crime than the perpetrator.  and while year after year, those who oppose even modest gun safety measures have threatened to defund scientific or medical research into the causes of gun violence, i will direct the centers for disease control to go ahead and study the best ways to reduce it - and congress should fund research into the effects that violent video games have on young minds. we don't benefit from ignorance. we don't benefit from not knowing the science of this epidemic of violence.  these are a few of the 23 executive actions that i'm announcing today. but as important as these steps are, they are in no way a substitute for action from members of congress. to make a real and lasting difference, congress, too, must act - and congress must act soon. and i'm calling on congress to pass some very specific proposals right away.  first: it's time for congress to require a universal background check for anyone trying to buy a gun. the law already requires licensed gun dealers to run background checks, and over the last 14 years that's kept 1.5 million of the wrong people from getting their hands on a gun. but it's hard to enforce that law when as many as 40 percent of all gun purchases are conducted without a background check. that's not safe. that's not smart. it's not fair to responsible gun buyers or sellers.  if you want to buy a gun - whether it's from a licensed dealer or a private seller - you should at least have to show you are not a felon or somebody legally prohibited from buying one. this is common sense. and an overwhelming majority of americans agree with us on the need for universal background checks - including more than 70 percent of the national rifle association's members, according to one survey. so there's no reason we can't do this.  second: congress should restore a ban on military-style assault weapons, and a 10-round limit for magazines. the type of assault rifle used in aurora, for example, when paired with high-capacity magazines, has one purpose - to pump out as many bullets as possible, as quickly as possible; to do as much damage, using bullets often designed to inflict maximum damage.  and that's what allowed the gunman in aurora to shoot 70 people - 70 people - killing 12 in a matter of minutes. weapons designed for the theater of war have no place in a movie theater. a majority of americans agree with us on this.  and, by the way, so did ronald reagan, one of the staunchest defenders of the second amendment, who wrote to congress in 1994, urging them - this is ronald reagan speaking - urging them to "listen to the american public and to the law enforcement community and support a ban on the further manufacture of [military-style assault] weapons."  and finally, congress needs to help, rather than hinder, law enforcement as it does its job. we should get tougher on people who buy guns with the express purpose of turning around and selling them to criminals. and we should severely punish anybody who helps them do this. since congress hasn't confirmed a director of the bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms in six years, they should confirm todd jones, who will be - who has been acting, and i will be nominating for the post.  and at a time when budget cuts are forcing many communities to reduce their police force, we should put more cops back on the job and back on our streets.  let me be absolutely clear. like most americans, i believe the second amendment guarantees an individual right to bear arms. i respect our strong tradition of gun ownership and the rights of hunters and sportsmen. there are millions of responsible, law-abiding gun owners in america who cherish their right to bear arms for hunting, or sport, or protection, or collection.  i also believe most gun owners agree that we can respect the second amendment while keeping an irresponsible, law-breaking few from inflicting harm on a massive scale. i believe most of them agree that if america worked harder to keep guns out of the hands of dangerous people, there would be fewer atrocities like the one that occurred in newtown. that's what these reforms are designed to do. they're common-sense measures. they have the support of the majority of the american people.  and yet, that doesn't mean any of this is going to be easy to enact or implement. if it were, we'd already have universal background checks. the ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines never would have been allowed to expire. more of our fellow americans might still be alive, celebrating birthdays and anniversaries and graduations.  this will be difficult. there will be pundits and politicians and special interest lobbyists publicly warning of a tyrannical, all-out assault on liberty - not because that's true, but because they want to gin up fear or higher ratings or revenue for themselves. and behind the scenes, they'll do everything they can to block any common-sense reform and make sure nothing changes whatsoever.  the only way we will be able to change is if their audience, their constituents, their membership says this time must be different - that this time, we must do something to protect our communities and our kids.  i will put everything i've got into this, and so will joe. but i tell you, the only way we can change is if the american people demand it. and by the way, that doesn't just mean from certain parts of the country. we're going to need voices in those areas, in those congressional districts, where the tradition of gun ownership is strong to speak up and to say this is important. it can't just be the usual suspects. we have to examine ourselves and our hearts, and ask ourselves what is important.  this will not happen unless the american people demand it. if parents and teachers, police officers and pastors, if hunters and sportsmen, if responsible gun owners, if americans of every background stand up and say, enough; we've suffered too much pain and care too much about our children to allow this to continue - then change will come. that's what it's going to take.  in the letter that julia wrote me, she said, "i know that laws have to be passed by congress, but i beg you to try very hard." julia, i will try very hard. but she's right. the most important changes we can make depend on congressional action. they need to bring these proposals up for a vote, and the american people need to make sure that they do.  get them on record. ask your member of congress if they support universal background checks to keep guns out of the wrong hands. ask them if they support renewing a ban on military-style assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. and if they say no, ask them why not. ask them what's more important - doing whatever it takes to get a a grade from the gun lobby that funds their campaigns, or giving parents some peace of mind when they drop their child off for first grade?  this is the land of the free, and it always will be. as americans, we are endowed by our creator with certain inalienable rights that no man or government can take away from us. but we've also long recognized, as our founders recognized, that with rights come responsibilities. along with our freedom to live our lives as we will comes an obligation to allow others to do the same. we don't live in isolation. we live in a society, a government of, and by, and for the people. we are responsible for each other.  the right to worship freely and safely, that right was denied to sikhs in oak creek, wisconsin. the right to assemble peaceably, that right was denied shoppers in clackamas, oregon, and moviegoers in aurora, colorado. that most fundamental set of rights to life and liberty and the pursuit of happiness - fundamental rights that were denied to college students at virginia tech, and high school students at columbine, and elementary school students in newtown, and kids on street corners in chicago on too frequent a basis to tolerate, and all the families who've never imagined that they'd lose a loved one to a bullet - those rights are at stake. we're responsible.  when i visited newtown last month, i spent some private time with many of the families who lost their children that day. and one was the family of grace mcdonald. grace's parents are here. grace was seven years old when she was struck down - just a gorgeous, caring, joyful little girl. i'm told she loved pink. she loved the beach. she dreamed of becoming a painter.  and so just before i left, chris, her father, gave me one of her paintings, and i hung it in my private study just off the oval office. and every time i look at that painting, i think about grace. and i think about the life that she lived and the life that lay ahead of her, and most of all, i think about how, when it comes to protecting the most vulnerable among us, we must act now - for grace. for the 25 other innocent children and devoted educators who had so much left to give. for the men and women in big cities and small towns who fall victim to senseless violence each and every day. for all the americans who are counting on us to keep them safe from harm. let's do the right thing. let's do the right thing for them, and for this country that we love so much.  thank you. let's sign these orders.  good evening. tonight, i can report to the american people and to the world, the united states has conducted an operation that killed osama bin laden, the leader of al qaeda, and a terrorist who's responsible for the murder of thousands of innocent men, women, and children. it was nearly 10 years ago that a bright september day was darkened by the worst attack on the american people in our history. the images of 9/11 are seared into our national memory -- hijacked planes cutting through a cloudless september sky; the twin towers collapsing to the ground; black smoke billowing up from the pentagon; the wreckage of flight 93 in shanksville, pennsylvania, where the actions of heroic citizens saved even more heartbreak and destruction. and yet we know that the worst images are those that were unseen to the world. the empty seat at the dinner table. children who were forced to grow up without their mother or their father. parents who would never know the feeling of their child's embrace. nearly 3,000 citizens taken from us, leaving a gaping hole in our hearts. on september 11, 2001, in our time of grief, the american people came together. we offered our neighbors a hand, and we offered the wounded our blood. we reaffirmed our ties to each other, and our love of community and country. on that day, no matter where we came from, what god we prayed to, or what race or ethnicity we were, we were united as one american family. we were also united in our resolve to protect our nation and to bring those who committed this vicious attack to justice. we quickly learned that the 9/11 attacks were carried out by al qaeda -- an organization headed by osama bin laden, which had openly declared war on the united states and was committed to killing innocents in our country and around the globe. and so we went to war against al qaeda to protect our citizens, our friends, and our allies. over the last 10 years, thanks to the tireless and heroic work of our military and our counterterrorism professionals, we've made great strides in that effort. we've disrupted terrorist attacks and strengthened our homeland defense. in afghanistan, we removed the taliban government, which had given bin laden and al qaeda safe haven and support. and around the globe, we worked with our friends and allies to capture or kill scores of al qaeda terrorists, including several who were a part of the 9/11 plot. yet osama bin laden avoided capture and escaped across the afghan border into pakistan. meanwhile, al qaeda continued to operate from along that border and operate through its affiliates across the world. and so shortly after taking office, i directed leon panetta, the director of the cia, to make the killing or capture of bin laden the top priority of our war against al qaeda, even as we continued our broader efforts to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat his network. then, last august, after years of painstaking work by our intelligence community, i was briefed on a possible lead to bin laden. it was far from certain, and it took many months to run this thread to ground. i met repeatedly with my national security team as we developed more information about the possibility that we had located bin laden hiding within a compound deep inside of pakistan. and finally, last week, i determined that we had enough intelligence to take action, and authorized an operation to get osama bin laden and bring him to justice. today, at my direction, the united states launched a targeted operation against that compound in abbottabad, pakistan. a small team of americans carried out the operation with extraordinary courage and capability. no americans were harmed. they took care to avoid civilian casualties. after a firefight, they killed osama bin laden and took custody of his body. for over two decades, bin laden has been al qaeda's leader and symbol, and has continued to plot attacks against our country and our friends and allies. the death of bin laden marks the most significant achievement to date in our nation's effort to defeat al qaeda. yet his death does not mark the end of our effort. there's no doubt that al qaeda will continue to pursue attacks against us. we must --- and we will -- remain vigilant at home and abroad. as we do, we must also reaffirm that the united states is not --- and never will be --- at war with islam. i've made clear, just as president bush did shortly after 9/11, that our war is not against islam. bin laden was not a muslim leader; he was a mass murderer of muslims. indeed, al qaeda has slaughtered scores of muslims in many countries, including our own. so his demise should be welcomed by all who believe in peace and human dignity. over the years, i've repeatedly made clear that we would take action within pakistan if we knew where bin laden was. that is what we've done. but it's important to note that our counterterrorism cooperation with pakistan helped lead us to bin laden and the compound where he was hiding. indeed, bin laden had declared war against pakistan as well, and ordered attacks against the pakistani people. tonight, i called president zardari, and my team has also spoken with their pakistani counterparts. they agree that this is a good and historic day for both of our nations. and going forward, it is essential that pakistan continue to join us in the fight against al qaeda and its affiliates. the american people did not choose this fight. it came to our shores, and started with the senseless slaughter of our citizens. after nearly 10 years of service, struggle, and sacrifice, we know well the costs of war. these efforts weigh on me every time i, as commander in chief, have to sign a letter to a family that has lost a loved one, or look into the eyes of a service member who's been gravely wounded. so americans understand the costs of war. yet as a country, we will never tolerate our security being threatened, nor stand idly by when our people have been killed. we will be relentless in defense of our citizens and our friends and allies. we will be true to the values that make us who we are. and on nights like this one, we can say to those families who have lost loved ones to al qaeda's terror: justice has been done. tonight, we give thanks to the countless intelligence and counterterrorism professionals who've worked tirelessly to achieve this outcome. the american people do not see their work, nor know their names. but tonight, they feel the satisfaction of their work and the result of their pursuit of justice. we give thanks for the men who carried out this operation, for they exemplify the professionalism, patriotism, and unparalleled courage of those who serve our country. and they are part of a generation that has borne the heaviest share of the burden since that september day. finally, let me say to the families who lost loved ones on 9/11 that we have never forgotten your loss, nor wavered in our commitment to see that we do whatever it takes to prevent another attack on our shores. and tonight, let us think back to the sense of unity that prevailed on 9/11. i know that it has, at times, frayed. yet today's achievement is a testament to the greatness of our country and the determination of the american people. the cause of securing our country is not complete. but tonight, we are once again reminded that america can do whatever we set our mind to. that is the story of our history, whether it's the pursuit of prosperity for our people, or the struggle for equality for all our citizens; our commitment to stand up for our values abroad, and our sacrifices to make the world a safer place. let us remember that we can do these things not just because of wealth or power, but because of who we are: one nation, under god, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. thank you. may god bless you. and may god bless the united states of america. thank you. thank you so much. thank you so much. thank you very much. thank you. everybody, please have a seat. thank you. mr. speaker, mr. vice president, members of congress, distinguished guests, and fellow americans, tonight i want to begin by congratulating the men and women of the 112th congress, as well as your new speaker, john boehner.  and as we mark this occasion, we're also mindful of the empty chair in this chamber, and we pray for the health of our colleague, and our friend, gabby giffords.  now, it's no secret that those of us here tonight have had our differences over the last two years. the debates have been contentious. we have fought fiercely for our beliefs. and that's a good thing. that's what a robust democracy demands. that's what helps set us apart as a nation. but there's a reason the tragedy in tucson gave us pause. amid all the noise and passion and rancor of our public debate, tucson reminded us that no matter who we are or where we come from, each of us is a part of something greater, something more consequential than party or political preference. we are part of the american family. we believe that in a country where every race and faith and point of view can be found, we are still bound together as one people, that we share common hopes and a common creed, that the dreams of a little girl in tucson are not so different than those of our own children, that they all deserve the chance to be fulfilled. that, too, is what sets us apart as a nation.  now, by itself, this simple recognition won't usher in a new era of cooperation. what comes of this moment is up to us. what comes of this moment will be determined not by whether we can sit together tonight, but whether we can work together tomorrow.  i believe we can, and i believe we must. that's what the people who sent us here expect of us. with their votes, they've determined that governing will now be a shared responsibility between parties. new laws will only pass with support from democrats and republicans. we will move forward together, or not at all, for the challenges we face are bigger than party and bigger than politics. at stake right now is not who wins the next election. after all, we just had an election. at stake is whether new jobs and industries take root in this country or somewhere else. it's whether the hard work and industry of our people is rewarded. it's whether we sustain the leadership that has made america not just a place on a map, but the light to the world. now, we are poised for progress. two years after the worst recession most of us have ever known, the stock market has come roaring back. corporate profits are up. the economy is growing again. but we have never measured progress by these yardsticks alone. we measure progress by the success of our people, by the jobs they can find and the quality of life those jobs offer; by the prospects of a small-business owner who dreams of turning a good idea into a thriving enterprise; by the opportunities for a better life that we pass on to our children. that's the project the american people want us to work on, together.  now, we did that in december. thanks to the tax cuts we passed, americans' paychecks are a little bigger today. every business can write off the full cost of new investments that they make this year. and these steps, taken by democrats and republicans, will grow the economy and add to the more than 1 million private-sector jobs created last year. but we have to do more. the steps we've taken over the last two years may have broken the back of this recession, but to win the future, we'll need to take on challenges that have been decades in the making. many people watching tonight can probably remember a time when finding a good job meant showing up at a nearby factory or a business downtown. you didn't always need a degree, and your competition was pretty much limited to your neighbors. if you worked hard, chances are you'd have a job for life, with a decent paycheck, and good benefits, and the occasional promotion. maybe you'd even have the pride of seeing your kids work at the same company. that world has changed. and for many, the change has been painful. i've seen it in the shuttered windows of once booming factories and the vacant storefronts on once busy main streets. i've heard it in the frustrations of americans who've seen their paychecks dwindle or their jobs disappear, proud men and women who feel like the rules have been changed in the middle of the game. they're right: the rules have changed. in a single generation, revolutions in technology have transformed the way we live, work, and do business. steel mills that once needed 1,000 workers can now do the same work with 100. today, just about any company can set up shop, hire workers, and sell their products wherever there's an internet connection. meanwhile, nations like china and india realized that with some changes of their own they could compete in this new world. and so they started educating their children earlier and longer, with greater emphasis on math and science. they're investing in research and new technologies. just recently, china became the home to the world's largest private solar research facility and the world's fastest computer. so, yes, the world has changed. the competition for jobs is real. but this shouldn't discourage us. it should challenge us. remember: for all the hits we've taken these last few years, for all the naysayers predicting our decline, america still has the largest, most prosperous economy in the world.  no workers -- no workers are more productive than ours. no country has more successful companies or grants more patents to inventors and entrepreneurs. we're the home to the world's best colleges and universities, where more students come to study than any place on earth. what's more, we are the first nation to be founded for the sake of an idea, the idea that each of us deserves the chance to shape our own destiny. that's why centuries of pioneers and immigrants have risked everything to come here. it's why our students don't just memorize equations, but answer questions like, "what do you think of that idea? what would you change about the world? what do you want to be when you grow up?" the future is ours to win. but to get there, we can't just stand still. as robert kennedy told us, "the future is not a gift. it is an achievement." sustaining the american dream has never been about standing pat. it has required each generation to sacrifice, and struggle, and meet the demands of a new age. and now it's our turn. we know what it takes to compete for the jobs and industries of our time. we need to out-innovate, out- educate, and out-build the rest of the world.  we have to make america the best place on earth to do business. we need to take responsibility for our deficit and reform our government. that's how our people will prosper; that's how we'll win the future.  and tonight, i'd like to talk about how we get there. the first step in winning the future is encouraging american innovation. none of us can predict with certainty what the next big industry will be or where the new jobs will come from. thirty years ago, we couldn't know that something called the internet would lead to an economic revolution. what we can do -- what america does better than anyone else -- is spark the creativity and imagination of our people. we're the nation that put cars in driveways and computers in offices, the nation of edison and the wright brothers, of google and facebook. in america, innovation doesn't just change our lives; it is how we make our living.  our free enterprise system is what drives innovation. but because it's not always profitable for companies to invest in basic research, throughout our history our government has provided cutting- edge scientists and inventors with the support that they need. that's what planted the seeds for the internet; that's what helped make possible things like computer chips and gps. just think of all the good jobs, from manufacturing to retail, that have come from those breakthroughs. and half-a-century ago, when the soviets beat us into space with the launch of a satellite called sputnik we had no idea how we would beat them to the moon. the science wasn't even there yet. nasa didn't exist. but after investing in better research and education, we didn't just surpass the soviets; we unleashed a wave of innovation that created new industries and millions of new jobs. this is our generation's sputnik moment. two years ago, i said that we needed to reach a level of research and development we haven't seen since the height of the space race. and in a few weeks, i will be sending a budget to congress that helps us meet that goal. we'll invest in biomedical research, information technology, and especially clean-energy technology...  ... an investment that will strengthen our security, protect our planet, and create countless new jobs for our people. already, we're seeing the promise of renewable energy. robert and gary allen are brothers who run a small michigan roofing company. after september 11th, they volunteered their best roofers to help repair the pentagon, but half of their factory went unused, and the recession hit them hard. today, with the help of a government loan, that empty space is being used to manufacture solar shingles that are being sold all across the country. in robert's words, "we reinvented ourselves." that's what americans have done for over 200 years: reinvented ourselves. and to spur on more success stories like the allen brothers, we've begun to reinvent our energy policy. we're not just handing out money. we're issuing a challenge. we're telling america's scientists and engineers that if they assemble teams of the best minds in their fields and focus on the hardest problems in clean energy, we'll fund the apollo projects of our time. at the california institute of technology, they're developing a way to turn sunlight and water into fuel for our cars. at oak ridge national laboratory, they're using supercomputers to get a lot more power out of our nuclear facilities. with more research and incentives, we can break our dependence on oil with biofuels and become the first country to have a million electric vehicles on the road by 2015.  we need to get behind this innovation. and to help pay for it, i'm asking congress to eliminate the billions in taxpayer dollars we currently give to oil companies.  i don't know if -- i don't know if you've noticed, but they're doing just fine on their own. so instead of subsidizing yesterday's energy, let's invest in tomorrow's. now, clean-energy breakthroughs will only translate into clean- energy jobs if businesses know there will be a market for what they're selling. so tonight, i challenge you to join me in setting a new goal: by 2035, 80 percent of america's electricity will come from clean-energy sources.  some folks want wind and solar. others want nuclear, clean coal, and natural gas. to meet this goal, we will need them all, and i urge democrats and republicans to work together to make it happen.  maintaining our leadership in research and technology is crucial to america's success. but if we want to win the future, if we want innovation to produce jobs in america and not overseas, then we also have to win the race to educate our kids. think about it. over the next 10 years, nearly half of all new jobs will require education that goes beyond a high school education. and yet, as many as a quarter of our students aren't even finishing high school. the quality of our math and science education lags behind many other nations. america has fallen to ninth in the proportion of young people with a college degree. and so the question is whether all of us -- as citizens and as parents -- are willing to do what's necessary to give every child a chance to succeed. that responsibility begins not in our classrooms, but in our homes and communities. it's family that first instills the love of learning in a child. only parents can make sure the tv is turned off and homework gets done. we need to teach our kids that it's not just the winner of the super bowl who deserves to be celebrated, but the winner of the science fair.  we need to teach them that success is not a function of fame or p.r., but of hard work and discipline. our schools share this responsibility. when a child walks into a classroom, it should be a place of high expectations and high performance. but too many schools don't meet this test. that's why instead of just pouring money into a system that's not working, we launched a competition called race to the top. to all 50 states, we said, if you show us the most innovative plans to improve teacher quality and student achievement, we'll show you the money. race to the top is the most meaningful reform of our public schools in a generation. for less than 1 percent of what we spend on education each year, it has led over 40 states to raise their standards for teaching and learning. and these standards were developed, by the way, not -- not by washington, but by republican and democratic governors throughout the country. and race to the top should be the approach we follow this year as we replace no child left behind with a law that's more flexible and focused on what's best for our kids.  you see, we know what's possible for our children, when reform isn't just a top-down mandate, but the work of local teachers and principals, school boards and communities. take a school like bruce randolph in denver. three years ago, it was rated one of the worst schools in colorado, located on turf between two rival gangs. but last may, 97 percent of the seniors received their diploma. most will be the first in their families to go to college. and after the first year of the school's transformation, the principal who made it possible wiped away tears when a student said "thank you, ms. waters, for showing that we are smart and we can make it."  that's what good schools can do, and we want good schools all across the country. let's also remember that, after parents, the biggest impact on a child's success comes from the man or woman at the front of the classroom. in south korea, teachers are known as "nation-builders." here in america, it's time we treated the people who educate our children with the same level of respect.  we want to reward good teachers and stop making excuses for bad ones.  and over the next 10 years, with so many baby boomers retiring from our classrooms, we want to prepare 100,000 new teachers in the fields of science, and technology, and engineering, and math.  in fact, to every young person listening tonight who's contemplating their career choice, if you want to make a difference in the life of our nation, if you want to make a difference in the life of a child, become a teacher. your country needs you.  of course, the education race doesn't end with a high school diploma. to compete, higher education must be within the reach of every american.  that's why -- that's why we've ended the unwarranted taxpayer subsidies that went to banks and used the savings to make college affordable for millions of students.  and this year, i ask congress to go further and make permanent our tuition tax credit, worth $10,000 for four years of college. it's the right thing to do.  because people need to be able to train for new jobs and careers in today's fast-changing economy, we're also revitalizing america's community colleges. last month, i saw the promise of these schools at forsyth tech in north carolina. many of the students there used to work in the surrounding factories that have since left town. one mother of two, a woman named kathy proctor, had worked in the furniture industry since she was 18 years old. and she told me she's earning her degree in biotechnology now, at 55 years old, not just because the furniture jobs are gone, but because she wants to inspire her children to pursue their dreams, too. as kathy said, "i hope it tells them to never give up." if we take these steps, if we raise expectations for every child, and give them the best possible chance at an education, from the day they are born until the last job they take, we will reach the goal that i set two years ago: by the end of the decade, america will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.  one last point about education. today, there are hundreds of thousands of students excelling in our schools who are not american citizens. some are the children of undocumented workers, who had nothing to do with the actions of their parents. they grew up as americans and pledge allegiance to our flag, and yet they live every day with the threat of deportation. others come here from abroad to study in our colleges and universities. but as soon as they obtain advanced degrees, we send them back home to compete against us. it makes no sense. now, i strongly believe that we should take on, once and for all, the issue of illegal immigration. and i am prepared to work with republicans and democrats to protect our borders, enforce our laws, and address the millions of undocumented workers who are now living in the shadows.  i know that debate will be difficult; i know it will take time. but tonight, let's agree to make that effort. and let's stop expelling talented, responsible young people who could be staffing our research labs, or starting a new business, who could be further enriching this nation.  the third step in winning the future is rebuilding america. to attract new businesses to our shores, we need the fastest, most reliable ways to move people, goods, and information, from high- speed rail to high-speed internet.  our infrastructure used to be the best, but our lead has slipped. south korean homes now have greater internet access than we do. countries in europe and russia invest more in their roads and railways than we do. china's building faster trains and newer airports. meanwhile, when our own engineers graded our nation's infrastructure, they gave us a d. we have to do better. america is the nation that built the transcontinental railroad, brought electricity to rural communities, constructed the interstate highway system. the jobs created by these projects didn't just come from laying down track or pavement; they came from businesses that opened near a town's new train station or the new off-ramp. so over the last two years, we've begun rebuilding for the 21st century, a project that has meant thousands of good jobs for the hard- hit construction industry. and tonight, i'm proposing that we redouble those efforts.  we'll put more americans to work repairing crumbling roads and bridges. we'll make sure this is fully paid for, attract private investment, and pick projects based on what's best for the economy, not politicians. within 25 years, our goal is to give 80 percent of americans access to high-speed rail.  this could allow you to go places in half the time it takes to travel by car. for some trips, it will be faster than flying, without the pat-down.   as we speak, routes in california and the midwest are already underway. within the next five years, we'll make it possible for businesses to deploy the next generation of high-speed wireless coverage to 98 percent of all americans. this isn't just about...  this isn't about faster internet or fewer dropped calls. it's about connecting every part of america to the digital age. it's about a rural community in iowa or alabama, where farmers and small-business owners will be able to sell their products all over the world. it's about a firefighter who can download the design of a burning building onto a handheld device, a student who can take classes with a digital textbook, or a patient who can have face-to-face video chats with her doctor. all these investments -- in innovation, education and infrastructure -- will make america a better place to do business and create jobs. but to help our companies compete, we also have to knock down barriers that stand in the way of their success. for example, over the years, a parade of lobbyists has rigged the tax code to benefit particular companies and industries. those with accountants or lawyers to work the system can end up paying no taxes at all, but all the rest are hit with one of the highest corporate tax rates in the world. it makes no sense, and it has to change.  so tonight, i'm asking democrats and republicans to simplify the system. get rid of the loopholes. level the playing field. and use the savings to lower the corporate tax rate for the first time in 25 years, without adding to our deficit. it can be done.  to help businesses sell more products abroad, we've set a goal of doubling our exports by 2014, because the more we export, the more jobs we create here at home. already, our exports are up. recently, we signed agreements with india and china that will support more than 250,000 jobs here in the united states. and last month, we finalized a trade agreement with south korea that will support at least 70,000 american jobs. this agreement has unprecedented support from business and labor, democrats and republicans, and i ask this congress to pass it as soon as possible.  now, before i took office, i made it clear that we would enforce our trade agreements and that i would only sign deals that keep faith with american workers and promote american jobs. that's what we did with korea, and that's what i intend to do as we pursue agreements with panama and colombia and continue our asia pacific and global trade talks.  to reduce barriers to growth and investment, i've ordered a review of government regulations. when we find rules that put an unnecessary burden on businesses, we will fix them.  but i will not hesitate to create or enforce commonsense safeguards to protect the american people.  that's what we've done in this country for more than a century. it's why our food is safe to eat, our water is safe to drink, and our air is safe to breathe. it's why we have speed limits and child labor laws. it's why last year we put in place consumer protections against hidden fees and penalties by credit card companies and new rules to prevent another financial crisis. and it's why we passed reform that finally prevents the health insurance industry from exploiting patients.  now...  now, i have heard rumors that a few of you still have concerns about our new health care law.  so let me be the first to say that anything can be improved. if you have ideas about how to improve this law by making care better or more affordable, i am eager to work with you. we can start right now by correcting a flaw in the legislation that has placed an unnecessary bookkeeping burden on small businesses.  what i'm not willing to do -- what i'm not willing to do is go back to the days when insurance companies could deny someone coverage because of a pre-existing condition.  i'm not willing to tell james howard, a brain cancer patient from texas, that his treatment might not be covered. i'm not willing to tell jim houser, a small-business man from oregon, he has to go back to paying $5,000 more to cover his employees. as we speak, this law is making prescription drugs cheaper for seniors and giving uninsured students a chance to stay on their patients' -- parents' coverage.  so i say to this chamber tonight, instead of re-fighting the battles of the last two years, let's fix what needs fixing and let's move forward.  now, the final, critical step in winning the future is to make sure we aren't buried under a mountain of debt. we are living with a legacy of deficit-spending that began almost a decade ago. and in the wake of the financial crisis, some of that was necessary to keep credit flowing, save jobs, and put money in people's pockets. but now that the worst of the recession is over, we have to confront the fact that our government spends more than it takes in. that is not sustainable. every day, families sacrifice to live within their means. they deserve a government that does the same.  so tonight, i am proposing that, starting this year, we freeze annual domestic spending for the next five years. now, this would reduce the deficit by more than $400 billion over the next decade and will bring discretionary spending to the lowest share of our economy since dwight eisenhower was president. this freeze will require painful cuts. already, we've frozen the salaries of hard-working federal employees for the next two years. i've proposed cuts to things i care deeply about, like community action programs. the secretary of defense has also agreed to cut tens of billions of dollars in spending that he and his generals believe our military can do without.  i recognize that some in this chamber have already proposed deeper cuts, and i'm willing to eliminate whatever we can honestly afford to do without. but let's make sure that we're not doing it on the backs of our most vulnerable citizens.  and let's make sure that what we're cutting is really excess weight. cutting the deficit by gutting our investments in innovation and education is like lightening an overloaded airplane by removing its engine. it may make you feel like you're flying high at first, but it won't take long before you'll feel the impact. now, most of the cuts and savings i've proposed only address annual domestic spending, which represents a little more than 12 percent of our budget. to make further progress, we have to stop pretending that cutting this kind of spending alone will be enough. it won't.  the bipartisan fiscal commission i created last year made this crystal clear. i don't agree with all their proposals, but they made important progress. and their conclusion is that the only way to tackle our deficit is to cut excessive spending wherever we find it, in domestic spending, defense spending, health care spending, and spending through tax breaks and loopholes.  this means further reducing health care costs, including programs like medicare and medicaid, which are the single biggest contributor to our long-term deficit. the health insurance law we passed last year will slow these rising costs, which is part of the reason that nonpartisan economists have said that repealing the health care law would add a quarter of a trillion dollars to our deficit. still, i'm willing to look at other ideas to bring down costs, including one that republicans suggested last year: medical malpractice reform to rein in frivolous lawsuits.  to put us on solid ground, we should also find a bipartisan solution to strengthen social security for future generations.  we must do it without putting at risk current retirees, the most vulnerable, or people with disabilities; without slashing benefits for future generations; and without subjecting americans' guaranteed retirement income to the whims of the stock market.  and if we truly care about our deficit, we simply can't afford a permanent extension of the tax cuts for the wealthiest 2 percent of americans.  before we take money away from our schools or scholarships away from our students, we should ask millionaires to give up their tax break. it's not a matter of punishing their success; it's about promoting america's success.  in fact, the best thing we could do on taxes for all americans is to simplify the individual tax code.  this will be a tough job, but members of both parties have expressed an interest in doing this, and i am prepared to join them.  so now is the time to act. now is the time for both sides and both houses of congress -- democrats and republicans -- to forge a principled compromise that gets the job done. if we make the hard choices now to rein in our deficits, we can make the investments we need to win the future. let me take this one step further. we shouldn't just give our people a government that's more affordable; we should give them a government that's more competent and efficient. we can't win the future with a government of the past.  we live and do business in the information age, but the last major reorganization of the government happened in the age of black- and-white tv. there are 12 different agencies that deal with exports. there are at least five different agencies that deal with housing policy. then there's my favorite example: the interior department is in charge of salmon while they're in freshwater, but the commerce department handles them in when they're in saltwater. i hear it gets even more complicated once they're smoked.  now...  ... we've made great strides over the last two years in using technology and getting rid of waste. veterans can now download their electronic medical records with a click of the mouse. we're selling acres of federal office space that hasn't been used in years, and we'll cut through red tape to get rid of more. but we need to think bigger. in the coming months, my administration will develop a proposal to merge, consolidate, and reorganize the federal government in a way that best serves the goal of a more competitive america. i will submit that proposal to congress for a vote, and we will push to get it passed.  in the coming year, we'll also work to rebuild people's faith in the institution of government. because you deserve to know exactly how and where your tax dollars are being spent, you'll be able to go to a website and get that information for the very first time in history. because you deserve to know when your elected officials are meeting with lobbyists, i ask congress to do what the white house has already done: put that information online. and because the american people deserve to know that special interests aren't larding up legislation with pet projects, both parties in congress should know this: if a bill comes to my desk with earmarks inside, i will veto it. i will veto it.  the 21st century government that's open and competent, a government that lives within its means, an economy that's driven by new skills and new ideas. our success in this new and changing world will require reform, responsibility and innovation. it will also require us to approach that world with a new level of engagement in our foreign affairs. just as jobs and businesses can now race across borders, so can new threats and new challenges. no single wall separates east and west; no one rival superpower is aligned against us. and so we must defeat determined enemies wherever they are and build coalitions that cut across lines of region and race and religion. and america's moral example must always shine for all who yearn for freedom, and justice, and dignity. and because we've begun this work, tonight we can say that american leadership has been renewed and america's standing has been restored. look to iraq, where nearly 100,000 of our brave men and women have left with their heads held high...  ... american combat patrols have ended, violence is down, and a new government has been formed. this year, our civilians will forge a lasting partnership with the iraqi people, while we finish the job of bringing our troops out of iraq. america's commitment has been kept; the iraq war is coming to an end.  of course, as we speak, al qaeda and their affiliates continue to plan attacks against us. thanks to our intelligence and law enforcement professionals, we're disrupting plots and securing our cities and skies. and as extremists try to inspire acts of violence within our borders, we are responding with the strength of our communities, with respect for the rule of law, and with the conviction that american muslims are a part of our american family.  we've also taken the fight to al qaeda and their allies abroad. in afghanistan, our troops have taken taliban strongholds and trained afghan security forces. our purpose is clear: by preventing the taliban from re-establishing a stranglehold over the afghan people, we will deny al qaeda the safe haven that served as a launching pad for 9/11. thanks to our heroic troops and civilians, fewer afghans are under the control of the insurgency. there will be tough fighting ahead, and the afghan government will need to deliver better governance. but we are strengthening the capacity of the afghan people and building an enduring partnership with them. this year, we will work with nearly 50 countries to begin a transition to an afghan lead. and this july, we will begin to bring our troops home.  in pakistan, al qaeda's leadership is under more pressure than at any point since 2001. their leaders and operatives are being removed from the battlefield. their safe havens are shrinking. and we've sent a message from the afghan border to the arabian peninsula to all parts of the globe: we will not relent, we will not waver, and we will defeat you.  american leadership can also be seen in the effort to secure the worst weapons of war. because republicans and democrats approved the new start treaty, far fewer nuclear weapons and launchers will be deployed. because we rallied the world, nuclear materials are being locked down on every continent so they never fall into the hands of terrorists. because of a diplomatic effort to insist that iran meet its obligations, the iranian government now faces tougher sanctions, tighter sanctions than ever before. and on the korean peninsula, we stand with our ally, south korea, and insist that north korea keeps its commitment to abandon nuclear weapons.  this is just a part of how we're shaping a world that favors peace and prosperity. with our european allies, we revitalized nato and increased our cooperation on everything from counterterrorism to missile defense. we've reset our relationship with russia, strengthened asian alliances, built new partnerships with nations like india. this march, i will travel to brazil, chile, and el salvador to forge new alliances across the americas. around the globe, we're standing with those who take responsibility, helping farmers grow more food, supporting doctors who care for the sick, and combating the corruption that can rot a society and rob people of opportunity. now, recent events have shown us that what sets us apart must not just be our power; it must also be the purpose behind it. in south sudan -- with our assistance -- the people were finally able to vote for independence after years of war.  thousands lined up before dawn. people danced in the streets. one man who lost four of his brothers at war summed up the scene around him: "this was a battlefield for most of my life," he said. "now we want to be free."  and we saw that same desire to be free in tunisia, where the will of the people proved more powerful than the writ of a dictator. and tonight, let us be clear: the united states of america stands with the people of tunisia and supports the democratic aspirations of all people.  we must never forget that the things we've struggled for and fought for live in the hearts of people everywhere. and we must always remember that the americans who have borne the greatest burden in this struggle are the men and women who serve our country.  tonight, let us speak with one voice in reaffirming that our nation is united in support of our troops and their families. let us serve them as well as they've served us, by giving them the equipment they need, by providing them with the care and benefits that they have earned, and by enlisting our veterans in the great task of building our own nation. our troops come from every corner of this country. they're black, white, latino, asian, native american. they are christian and hindu, jewish and muslim. and, yes, we know that some of them are gay. starting this year, no american will be forbidden from serving the country they love because of who they love.  and with that change, i call on all our college campuses to open their doors to our military recruiters and rotc. it is time to leave behind the divisive battles of the past; it is time to move forward as one nation.  we should have no illusions about the work ahead of us. reforming our schools, changing the way we use energy, reducing our deficit, none of this will be easy. all of it will take time. and it will be harder because we will argue about everything: the costs, the details, the letter of every law. of course, some countries don't have this problem. if the central government wants a railroad, they build a railroad, no matter how many homes get bulldozed. if they don't want a bad story in the newspaper, it doesn't get written. and yet, as contentious and frustrating and messy as our democracy can sometimes be, i know there isn't a person here who would trade places with any other nation on earth.  we may have differences in policy, but we all believe in the rights enshrined in our constitution. we may have different opinions, but we believe in the same promise that says this is a place where you can make it if you try. we may have different backgrounds, but we believe in the same dream that says this is a country where anything is possible, no matter who you are, no matter where you come from. that dream is why i can stand here before you tonight. that dream is why a working-class kid from scranton can sit behind me.  that dream is why someone who began by sweeping the floors of his father's cincinnati bar can preside as speaker of the house in the greatest nation on earth.  that dream, that american dream, is what drove the allen brothers to reinvent their roofing company for a new era. it's what drove those students at forsyth tech to learn a new skill and work towards the future. and that dream is the story of a small-business owner named brandon fisher. brandon started a company in berlin, pennsylvania, that specializes in a new kind of drilling technology. and one day last summer, he saw the news that halfway across the world, 33 men were trapped in a chilean mine and no one knew how to save them. but brandon thought his company could help. and so he designed a rescue that would come to be known as plan b. his employees worked around the clock to manufacture the necessary drilling equipment, and brandon left for chile. along with others, he began drilling a 2,000-foot hole into the ground, working three or four hour -- three or four days at a time without any sleep. thirty-seven days later, plan b succeeded, and the miners were rescued.  but because he didn't want all the attention, brandon wasn't there when the miners emerged. he'd already gone back home, back to work on his next project. and later, one of his employees said of the rescue, "we proved that center rock is a little company, but we do big things."  we do big things. from the earliest days of our founding, america has been the story of ordinary people who dare to dream. that's how we win the future. we're a nation that says, "i might not have a lot of money, but i have this great idea for a new company." "i might not come from a family of college graduates, but i will be the first to get my degree." "i might not know those people in trouble, but i think i can help them, and i need to try." "i'm not sure how we'll reach that better place beyond the horizon, but i know we'll get there. i know we will." we do big things. the idea of america endures. our destiny remains our choice. and tonight, more than two centuries later, it's because of our people that our future is hopeful, our journey goes forward, and the state of our union is strong. thank you, god bless you, and may god bless the united states of america. madam speaker, vice president biden, members of congress, distinguished guests, and fellow americans, our constitution declares that from time to time the president shall give to congress information about the state of our union. for 220 years, our leaders have fulfilled this duty. they've done so during periods of prosperity and tranquility, and they've done so in the midst of war and depression, at moments of great strife and great struggle. it's tempting to look back on these moments and assume that our progress was inevitable, that america was always destined to succeed. but when the union was turned back at bull run and the allies first landed at omaha beach, victory was very much in doubt. when the market crashed on black tuesday and civil rights marchers were beaten on bloody sunday, the future was anything but certain. these were the times that tested the courage of our convictions and the strength of our union. and despite all our divisions and disagreements, our hesitations and our fears, america prevailed because we chose to move forward as one nation, as one people. again, we are tested. and again, we must answer history's call. one year ago, i took office amid two wars, an economy rocked by a severe recession, a financial system on the verge of collapse, and a government deeply in debt. experts from across the political spectrum warned that if we did not act, we might face a second depression. so we acted, immediately and aggressively. and one year later, the worst of the storm has passed. but the devastation remains: one in 10 americans still can't find work. many businesses have shuttered. home values have declined. small towns and rural communities have been hit especially hard. and for those who'd already known poverty, life has become that much harder. this recession has also compounded the burdens that america's families have been dealing with for decades, the burden of working harder and longer for less, of being unable to save enough to retire or help kids with college. so i know the anxieties that are out there right now. they're not new. these struggles are the reason i ran for president. these struggles are what i've witnessed for years in places like elkhart, indiana, galesburg, illinois. i hear about them in the letters that i read each night. the toughest to read are those written by children, asking why they have to move from their home, asking when their mom or dad will be able to go back to work. for these americans and so many others, change has not come fast enough. some are frustrated; some are angry. they don't understand why it seems like bad behavior on wall street is rewarded, but hard work on main street isn't, or why washington has been unable or unwilling to solve any of our problems. they're tired of the partisanship and the shouting and the pettiness. they know we can't afford it, not now. so we face big and difficult challenges. and what the american people hope -- what they deserve -- is for all of us, democrats and republicans, to work through our differences, to overcome the numbing weight of our politics, for while the people who sent us here have different backgrounds, different stories, different beliefs, the anxieties they face are the same, the aspirations they hold are shared: a job that pays the bills, a chance to get ahead, most of all, the ability to give their children a better life. you know what else they share? they share a stubborn resilience in the face of adversity. after one of the most difficult years in our history, they remain busy building cars and teaching kids, starting businesses and going back to school. they're coaching little league and helping their neighbors. one woman wrote to me and said, "we are strained but hopeful, struggling but encouraged." it's because of this spirit -- this great decency and great strength -- that i have never been more hopeful about america's future than i am tonight.  despite -- despite our hardships, our union is strong. we do not give up. we do not quit. we do not allow fear or division to break our spirit. in this new decade, it's time the american people get a government that matches their decency, that embodies their strength.  and tonight -- tonight, i'd like to talk about how together we can deliver on that promise. it begins with our economy. our most urgent -- our most urgent task upon taking office was to shore up the same banks that helped cause this crisis. it was not easy to do. and if there's one thing that has unified democrats and republicans -- and everybody in between -- it's that we all hated the bank bailout. i hated it.  i hated it. i hated it. you hated it. it was about as popular as a root canal.  but when i ran for president, i promised i wouldn't just do what was popular, i would do what was necessary. and if we had allowed the meltdown of the financial system, unemployment might be double what it is today. more businesses would certainly have closed; more homes would have surely been lost. so i supported the last administration's efforts to create the financial rescue program. and when we took that program over, we made it more transparent and more accountable. and as a result, the markets are now stabilized, and we've recovered most of the money we spent on the banks.  most, but not all. to recover the rest, i've proposed a fee on the biggest banks. now...  now, i know wall street isn't keen on this idea, but if these firms can afford to hand out big bonuses again, they can afford a modest fee to pay back the taxpayers who rescued them in their time of need.  now, as we stabilized the financial system, we also took steps to get our economy growing again, save as many jobs as possible, and help americans who'd become unemployed. that's why we extended or increased unemployment benefits for more than 18 million americans, made health insurance 65 percent cheaper for families who get their coverage through cobra, and passed 25 different tax cuts. now, let me repeat: we cut taxes. we cut taxes for 95 percent of working families. we cut taxes for small businesses.  we cut taxes for first-time homebuyers. we cut taxes for parents trying to care for their children. we cut taxes for 8 million americans paying for college.  i thought i'd get some applause on that one.  as a result...  as a result, millions of americans had more to spend on gas and food and other necessities, all of which helped businesses keep more workers. and we haven't raised income taxes by a single dime on a single person, not a single dime.  now, because of the steps we took, there are about 2 million americans working right now who would otherwise be unemployed.  two-hundred-thousand work in construction and clean energy. three-hundred-thousand are teachers and other education workers. tens of thousands are cops, firefighters, correctional officers, first responders.  and we're on track to add another 1.5 million jobs to this total by the end of the year. the plan that has made all of this possible, from the tax cuts to the jobs, is the recovery act.  that's right, the recovery act, also known as the stimulus bill.  economists on the left and the right say this bill has helped saved jobs and avert disaster, but you don't have to take their word for it. talk to the small business in phoenix that will triple its workforce because of the recovery act. talk to the window manufacturer in philadelphia who said he used to be skeptical about the recovery act, until he had to add two more work shifts just because of the business it created. talk to the single teacher raising two kids who was told by her principal in the last week of school that, because of the recovery act, she wouldn't be laid off after all. there are stories like this all across america. and after two years of recession, the economy is growing again. retirement funds have started to gain back some of their value. businesses are beginning to invest again, and slowly, some are starting to hire again. but i realize that, for every success story, there are other stories, of men and women who wake up with the anguish of not knowing where their next paycheck will come from, who send out resumes week after week and hear nothing in response. that is why jobs must be our no. 1 focus in 2010, and that's why i'm calling for a new jobs bill tonight.  now, the true engine of job creation in this country will always be america's businesses...  ... but government can create the conditions necessary for businesses to expand and hire more workers. we should start where most new jobs do, in small businesses, companies that begin when...  ... companies that begin when an entrepreneur -- when an entrepreneur takes a chance on a dream or a worker decides it's time she became her own boss. through sheer grit and determination, these companies have weathered the recession and are ready to grow. but when you talk to small-business owners in places like allentown, pennsylvania, or elyria, ohio, you find out that even though banks on wall street are lending again, they're mostly lending to bigger companies. financing remains difficult for small-business owners across the country, even though they're making a profit. so tonight, i'm proposing that we take $30 billion of the money wall street banks have repaid and use it to help community banks give small businesses the credit they need to stay afloat.  i'm also proposing a new small-business tax credit, one that will go to over 1 million small businesses who hire new workers or raise wages.  while we're at it, let's also eliminate all capital gains taxes on small-business investment and provide a tax incentive for all large businesses and all small businesses to invest in new plants and equipment.  next, we can put americans to work today building the infrastructure of tomorrow.  from -- from the first railroads to the interstate highway system, our nation has always been built to compete. there's no reason europe or china should have the fastest trains or the new factories that manufacture clean-energy products. tomorrow, i'll visit tampa, florida, where workers will soon break ground on a new high-speed railroad funded by the recovery act. there are projects like that all across this country that will create jobs and help move our nation's goods, services and information.  we should put more americans to work building clean-energy facilities and give...  ... and give rebates to americans who make their homes more energy efficient, which supports clean-energy jobs.  and to encourage these and other businesses to stay within our borders, it is time to finally slash the tax breaks for companies that ship our jobs overseas and give those tax breaks to companies that create jobs right here in the united states of america. now, the house has passed a jobs bill that includes some of these steps.  as the first order of business this year, i urge the senate to do the same, and i know they will. they will.  people are out of work. they're hurting. they need our help. and i want a jobs bill on my desk without delay.  but -- but the truth is, these steps won't make up for the 7 million jobs that we've lost over the last two years. the only way to move to full employment is to lay a new foundation for long- term economic growth and finally address the problems that america's families have confronted for years. we can't afford another so-called economic "expansion" like the one from last decade, what some call the "lost decade," where jobs grew more slowly than during any prior expansion, where the income of the average american household declined while the cost of health care and tuition reached record highs, where prosperity was built on a housing bubble and financial speculation. from the day i took office, i've been told that addressing our larger challenges is too ambitious, such effort would be too contentious. i've been told that our political system is too gridlocked and that we should just put things on hold for a while. for those who make these claims, i have one simple question: how long should we wait? how long should america put its future on hold? you see...  you see, washington has been telling us to wait for decades, even as the problems have grown worse. meanwhile, china's not waiting to revamp its economy; germany's not waiting; india's not waiting. these nations, they're not standing still. these nations aren't playing for second place. they're putting more emphasis on math and science. they're rebuilding their infrastructure. they're making serious investments in clean energy because they want those jobs. well, i do not accept second place for the united states of america.  as hard as it may be, as uncomfortable and contentious as the debates may become, it's time to get serious about fixing the problems that are hampering our growth. now, one place to start is serious financial reform. look, i'm not interested in punishing banks. i'm interested in protecting our economy. a strong, healthy financial market makes it possible for businesses to access credit and create new jobs. it channels the savings of families into investments that raise incomes. but that can only happen if we guard against the same recklessness that nearly brought down our entire economy. we need to make sure consumers and middle-class families have the information they need to make financial decisions. we can't allow financial institutions, including those that take your deposits, to take risks that threaten the whole economy. now, the house has already passed financial reform with many of these changes. and -- and the lobbyists are trying to kill it. well, we cannot let them win this fight. and if the bill that ends up on my desk does not meet the test of real reform, i will send it back until we get it right. we've got to get it right.  next, we need to encourage american innovation. last year, we made the largest investment in basic research funding in history, an investment -- an investment that could lead to the world's cheapest solar cells or treatment that kills cancer cells but leaves healthy ones untouched. and no area is more ripe for such innovation than energy. you can see the results of last year's investments in clean energy in the north carolina company that will create 1,200 jobs nationwide, helping to make advanced batteries, or in the california business that will put 1,000 people to work making solar panels. but to create more of these clean-energy jobs, we need more production, more efficiency, more incentives, and that means building a new generation of safe, clean nuclear power plants in this country.  it means making tough decisions about opening new offshore areas for oil and gas development.  it means continued investment in advanced biofuels and clean-coal technologies.  and, yes, it means passing a comprehensive energy and climate bill with incentives that will finally make clean energy the profitable kind of energy in america.  i'm grateful to the house for passing such a bill last year.  and this year -- this year, i'm eager to help advance the bipartisan effort in the senate. i know there have been questions about whether we can afford such changes in a tough economy. i know that there are those who disagree with the overwhelming scientific evidence on climate change. but -- but here's the thing. even if you doubt the evidence, providing incentives for energy efficiency and clean energy are the right thing to do for our future, because the nation that leads the clean-energy economy will be the nation that leads the global economy, and america must be that nation.  third, we need to export more of our goods.  because the more products we make and sell to other countries, the more jobs we support right here in america. so...  so tonight, we set a new goal: we will double our exports over the next five years, an increase that will support 2 million jobs in america.  to help meet this goal, we're launching a national export initiative that will help farmers and small businesses increase their exports and reform export controls consistent with national security. we have to seek new markets aggressively, just as our competitors are. if america sits on the sidelines while other nations sign trade deals, we will lose the chance to create jobs on our shores.  but realizing those benefits also means enforcing those agreements so our trading partners play by the rules.  and that's why we'll continue to shape a doha trade agreement that opens global markets and why we will strengthen our trade relations in asia and with key partners like south korea, and panama, and colombia.  fourth, we need to invest in the skills and education of our people. now, this year -- this year, we've broken through the stalemate between left and right by launching a national competition to improve our schools. and the idea here is simple: instead of rewarding failure, we only reward success. instead of funding the status quo, we only invest in reform, reform that raises student achievement, inspires students to excel in math and science, and turns around failing schools that steal the future of too many young americans, from rural communities to the inner city. in the 21st century, the best anti-poverty program around is a world-class education.  and in this country, the success of our children cannot depend more on where they live than on their potential. when we renew the elementary and secondary education act, we will work with congress to expand these reforms to all 50 states. still, in this economy, a high school diploma no longer guarantees a good job. that's why i urge the senate to follow the house and pass a bill that will revitalize our community colleges, which are a career pathway to the children of so many working families.  to make college more affordable, this bill will finally end the unwarranted taxpayer subsidies that go to banks for student loans. instead, let's take that money and give families a $10,000 tax credit for four years of college and increase pell grants.  and let's tell another 1 million students that, when they graduate, they will be required to pay only 10 percent of their income on student loans, and all of their debt will be forgiven after 20 years, and forgiven after 10 years if they choose a career in public service, because in the united states of america, no one should go broke because they chose to go to college.  and, by the way, it's time for colleges and universities to get serious about cutting their own costs, because they, too, have a responsibility to help solve this problem. now, the price of college tuition is just one of the burdens facing the middle class. that's why last year i asked vice president biden to chair a task force on middle-class families. that's why we're nearly doubling the childcare tax credit and making it easier to save for retirement by giving access to every worker a retirement account and expanding the tax credit for those who start a nest egg. that's why we're working to lift the value of a family's single largest investment, their home. the steps we took last year to shore up the housing market have allowed millions of americans to take out new loans and save an average of $1,500 on mortgage payments. this year, we will step up refinancing so that homeowners can move into more affordable mortgages. and...  and it is precisely to relieve the burden on middle-class families that we still need health insurance reform.  we do.  now, let's clear a few things up.  i didn't choose to tackle this issue to get some legislative victory under my belt. and by now, it should be fairly obvious that i didn't take on health care because it was good politics.  i took on health care because of the stories i've heard, from americans with pre-existing conditions whose lives depend on getting coverage, patients who've been denied coverage, families, even those with insurance, who are just one illness away from financial ruin. after nearly a century of trying -- democratic administrations, republican administrations -- we are closer than ever to bringing more security to the lives of so many americans. the approach we've taken would protect every american from the worst practices of the insurance industry. it would give small businesses and uninsured americans a chance to choose an affordable health care plan in a competitive market. it would require every insurance plan to cover preventive care. and by the way, i want to acknowledge our first lady, michelle obama, who this year is creating a national movement to tackle the epidemic of childhood obesity and make kids healthier. thank you, honey.  she gets embarrassed.  our approach would preserve the right of americans who have insurance to keep their doctor and their plan. it would reduce costs and premiums for millions of families and businesses. and according to the congressional budget office, the independent organization that both parties have cited as the official scorekeeper for congress, our approach would bring down the deficit by as much as $1 trillion over the next two decades.  still, this is a complex issue. and the longer it was debated, the more skeptical people became. i take my share of the blame for not explaining it more clearly to the american people. and i know that with all the lobbying and horse-trading, this process left most americans wondering, "what's in it for me?" but i also know this problem is not going away. by the time i'm finished speaking tonight, more americans will have lost their health insurance. millions will lose it this year. our deficit will grow. premiums will go up. patients will be denied the care they need. small-business owners will continue to drop coverage altogether. i will not walk away from these americans, and neither should the people in this chamber.  as temperatures cool, i want everyone to take another look at the plan we've proposed. there's a reason why many doctors, nurses and health care experts who know our system best consider this approach a vast improvement over the status quo. but if anyone from either party has a better approach that will bring down premiums, bring down the deficit, cover the uninsured, strengthen medicare for seniors, and stop insurance company abuses, let me know.  let me know. let me know.  i'm eager to see it. here's what i ask congress, though: don't walk away from reform, not now, not when we are so close. let us find a way to come together and finish the job for the american people. let's get it done.  let's get it done.  now, even as health care reform would reduce our deficit, it's not enough to dig us out of a massive fiscal hole in which we find ourselves. it's a challenge that makes all others that much harder to solve and one that's been subject to a lot of political posturing. so let me start the discussion of government spending by setting the record straight. at the beginning of the last decade, the year 2000, america had a budget surplus of over $200 billion. by -- by the time i took office, we had a one-year deficit of over $1 trillion and projected deficits of $8 trillion over the next decade. most of this was the result of not paying for two wars, two tax cuts, and an expensive prescription drug program. on top of that, the effects of the recession put a $3 trillion hole in our budget. all this was before i walked in the door.  now...  now -- just stating the facts. now, if we had taken office in ordinary times, i would have liked nothing more than to start bringing down the deficit. but we took office amid a crisis, and our efforts to prevent a second depression have added another $1 trillion to our national debt. that, too, is a fact. i'm absolutely convinced that was the right thing to do, but families across the country are tightening their belts and making tough decisions. the federal government should do the same.  so tonight, i'm proposing specific steps to pay for the $1 trillion that it took to rescue the economy last year. starting in 2011, we are prepared to freeze government spending for three years. spending related to our national security, medicare, medicaid and social security will not be affected, but all other discretionary government programs will. like any cash-strapped family, we will work within a budget to invest in what we need and sacrifice what we don't. and if i have to enforce this discipline by veto, i will.  we will continue to go through the budget line by line, page by page, to eliminate programs that we can't afford and don't work. we've already identified $20 billion in savings for next year. to help working families, we'll extend our middle-class tax cuts. but at a time of record deficits, we will not continue tax cuts for oil companies, for investment fund managers, and for those making over $250,000 a year. we just can't afford it.  now, even after paying for what we spent on my watch, we'll still face the massive deficit we had when i took office. more importantly, the cost of medicare, medicaid, and social security will continue to skyrocket. that's why i've called for a bipartisan fiscal commission, modeled on a proposal by republican judd gregg and democrat kent conrad.  this can't be one of those washington gimmicks that lets us pretend we solved a problem. the commission will have to provide a specific set of solutions by a certain deadline. now, yesterday, the senate blocked a bill that would have created this commission. so i'll issue an executive order that will allow us to go forward, because i refuse to pass this problem on to another generation of americans.  and when the vote comes tomorrow, the senate should restore the pay-as-you-go law that was a big reason for why we had record surpluses in the 1990s.  now, i know that some in my own party will argue that we can't address the deficit or freeze government spending when so many are still hurting. and i agree, which is why this freeze won't take effect until next year, when the economy is stronger. that's how budgeting works.  but understand -- understand, if we don't take meaningful steps to rein in our debt, it could damage our markets, increase the cost of borrowing, and jeopardize our recovery, all of which would have an even worse effect on our job growth and family incomes. from some on the right, i expect we'll hear a different argument, that if we just make fewer investments in our people, extend tax cuts, including those for the wealthier americans, eliminate more regulations, maintain the status quo on health care, our deficits will go away. the problem is, that's what we did for eight years.  that's what helped us into this crisis. it's what helped lead to these deficits. we can't do it again. rather than fight the same tired battles that have dominated washington for decades, it's time to try something new. let's invest in our people without leaving them a mountain of debt. let's meet our responsibility to the citizens who sent us here. let's try common sense, a novel concept. now, to do that, we have to recognize that we face more than a deficit of dollars right now. we face a deficit of trust, deep and corrosive doubts about how washington works that have been growing for years. to close that credibility gap, we have to take action on both ends of pennsylvania avenue, to end the outsized influence of lobbyists, to do our work openly, to give our people the government they deserve.  that's what i came to washington to do. that's why, for the first time in history, my administration posts our white house visitors online. that's why we've excluded lobbyists from policy-making jobs or seats on federal boards and commissions. but we can't stop there. it's time to require lobbyists to disclose each contact they make on behalf of a client with my administration or with congress. it's time to put strict limits on the contributions that lobbyists give to candidates for federal office. with all due deference to separation of powers, last week, the supreme court reversed a century of law that i believe will open the floodgates for special interests, including foreign corporations, to spend without limit in our elections.  i don't think american elections should be bankrolled by america's most powerful interests or, worse, by foreign entities. they should be decided by the american people. and i urge democrats and republicans to pass a bill that helps correct some of these problems. i'm also calling on congress to continue down the path of earmark reform, democrats and republicans.  democrats and republicans, you've trimmed some of this spending. you've embraced some meaningful change, but restoring the public trust demands more. for example, some members of congress post some earmark requests online.  tonight, i'm calling on congress to publish all earmark requests on a single web site before there's a vote so that the american people can see how their money is being spent.  of course, none of these reforms will even happen if we don't also reform how we work with one another. now, i'm not naive. i never thought that the mere fact of my election would usher in peace and harmony and some post-partisan era. i knew that both parties have fed divisions that are deeply entrenched. and on some issues, there are simply philosophical differences that will always cause us to part ways. these disagreements, about the role of government in our lives, about our national priorities and our national security, they've been taking place for over 200 years. they're the very essence of our democracy. but what frustrates the american people is a washington where every day is election day. we can't wage a perpetual campaign where the only goal is to see who can get the most embarrassing headlines about the other side, a belief that if you lose, i win. neither party should delay or obstruct every single bill just because they can. the confirmation of...  i'm speaking of both parties now. the confirmation of well-qualified public servants shouldn't be held hostage to the pet projects or grudges of a few individual senators.  washington may think that saying anything about the other side, no matter how false, no matter how malicious, is just part of the game. but it's precisely such politics that has stopped either party from helping the american people. worse yet -- worse yet, it's sowing further division among our citizens, further distrust in our government. so, no, i will not give up on trying to change the tone of our politics. i know it's an election year. and after last week, it's clear that campaign fever has come even earlier than usual. but we still need to govern. to democrats, i would remind you that we still have the largest majority in decades and the people expect us to solve problems, not run for the hills.  and if the republican leadership is going to insist that 60 votes in the senate are required to do any business at all in this town, a supermajority, then the responsibility to govern is now yours, as well. just saying no to everything may be good short-term politics, but it's not leadership. we were sent here to serve our citizens, not our ambitions.  so let's show the american people that we can do it together.  this week -- this week, i'll be addressing a meeting of the house republicans. i'd like to begin monthly meetings with both democratic and republican leadership. i know you can't wait.  now, throughout our history, no issue has united this country more than our security. sadly, some of the unity we felt after 9/11 has dissipated. and we can argue all we want about who's to blame for this, but i'm not interested in re-litigating the past. i know that all of us love this country. all of us are committed to its defense. so let's put aside the schoolyard taunts about who's tough. let's reject the false choice between protecting our people and upholding our values. let's leave behind the fear and division and do what it takes to defend our nation and forge a more hopeful future, for america and for the world.  that's the work we began last year. since the day i took office, we renewed our focus on the terrorists who threaten our nation. we've made substantial investments in our homeland security and disrupted plots that threatened to take american lives. we are filling unacceptable gaps revealed by the failed christmas attack with better airline security and swifter action on our intelligence. we've prohibited torture and strengthened partnerships from the pacific to south asia to the arabian peninsula. and in the last year, hundreds of al qaeda's fighters and affiliates, including many senior leaders, have been captured or killed, far more than in 2008. and in afghanistan, we're increasing our troops and training afghan security forces so they can begin to take the lead in july of 2011 and our troops can begin to come home.  we will reward good governance, work to reduce corruption, and support the rights of all afghans, men and women alike. we're joined by allies and partners who have increased their own commitment and who'll come together tomorrow in london to reaffirm our common purpose. there will be difficult days ahead, but i am absolutely confident we will succeed. as we take the fight to al qaeda, we are responsibly leaving iraq to its people. as a candidate, i promised that i would end this war, and that is what i am doing as president. we will have all of our combat troops out of iraq by the end of this august.  we will support -- we will support the iraqi government -- we will support the iraqi government as they hold elections, and we will continue to partner with the iraqi people to promote regional peace and prosperity. but make no mistake: this war is ending, and all of our troops are coming home.  tonight, all of our men and women in uniform -- in iraq, in afghanistan, and around the world -- they have to know that we -- that they have our respect, our gratitude, our full support. and just as they must have the resources they need in war, we all have a responsibility to support them when they come home.  that's why we made the largest increase in investments for veterans in decades last year.  that's why we're building a 21st-century [veterans affairs]. and that's why michelle has joined with jill biden to forge a national commitment to support military families.  now, even as we prosecute two wars, we're also confronting perhaps the greatest danger to the american people, the threat of nuclear weapons. i've embraced the vision of john f. kennedy and ronald reagan through a strategy that reverses the spread of these weapons and seeks a world without them. to reduce our stockpiles and launchers, while ensuring our deterrent, the united states and russia are completing negotiations on the farthest-reaching arms control treaty in nearly two decades.  and at april's nuclear security summit, we will bring 44 nations together here in washington, d.c., behind a clear goal: securing all vulnerable nuclear materials around the world in four years so that they never fall into the hands of terrorists.  now, these diplomatic efforts have also strengthened our hand in dealing with those nations that insist on violating international agreements in pursuit of nuclear weapons. that's why north korea now faces increased isolation and stronger sanctions, sanctions that are being vigorously enforced. that's why the international community is more united and the islamic republic of iran is more isolated. and as iran's leaders continue to ignore their obligations, there should be no doubt: they, too, will face growing consequences. that is a promise.  that's the leadership we are providing: engagement that advances the common security and prosperity of all people. we're working through the g-20 to sustain a lasting global recovery. we're working with muslim communities around the world to promote science and education and innovation. we have gone from a bystander to a leader in the fight against climate change. we're helping developing countries to feed themselves and continuing the fight against hiv/aids. and we are launching a new initiative that will give us the capacity to respond faster and more effectively to bioterrorism or an infectious disease, a plan that will counter threats at home and strengthen public health abroad. as we have for over 60 years, america takes these actions because our destiny is connected to those beyond our shores. but we also do it because it is right. that's why, as we meet here tonight, over 10,000 americans are working with many nations to help the people of haiti recover and rebuild.  that's why we stand with the girl who yearns to go to school in afghanistan, why we support the human rights of the women marching through the streets of iran, why we advocate for the young man denied a job by corruption in guinea, for america must always stand on the side of freedom and human dignity, always.  abroad, america's greatest source of strength has always been our ideals. the same is true at home. we find unity in our incredible diversity, drawing on the promise enshrined in our constitution, the notion that we're all created equal, that no matter who you are or what you look like, if you abide by the law, you should be protected by it, if you adhere to our common values, you should be treated no different than anyone else. we must continually renew this promise. my administration has a civil rights division that is once again prosecuting civil rights violations and employment discrimination. we finally strengthened...  we finally strengthened our laws to protect against crimes driven by hate.  this year -- this year, i will work with congress and our military to finally repeal the law that denies gay americans the right to serve the country they love because of who they are. it's the right thing to do.  we're going to crack down on violations of equal pay laws, so that women get equal pay for an equal day's work.  and we should continue the work of fixing our broken immigration system, to secure our borders, and enforce our laws, and ensure that everyone who plays by the rules can contribute to our economy and enrich our nations.  in the end, it's our ideals, our values that built america, values that allowed us to forge a nation made up of immigrants from every corner of the globe, values that drive our citizens still. every day, americans meet their responsibilities to their families and their employers. time and again, they lend a hand to their neighbors and give back to their country. they take pride in their labor and are generous in spirit. these aren't republican values or democratic values that they're living by, business values or labor values. they're american values. unfortunately, too many of our citizens have lost faith that our biggest institutions -- our corporations, our media, and, yes, our government -- still reflect these same values. each of these institutions are full of honorable men and women doing important work that helps our country prosper. but each time a ceo rewards himself for failure or a banker puts the rest of us at risk for his own selfish gain, people's doubts grow. each time lobbyists game the system or politicians tear each other down instead of lifting this country up, we lose faith. the more that tv pundits reduce serious debates to silly arguments, big issues into sound bites, our citizens turn away. no wonder there's so much cynicism out there. no wonder there's so much disappointment. i campaigned on the promise of change, change we can believe in, the slogan went. and right now, i know there are many americans who aren't sure if they still believe we can change, or that i can deliver it. but remember this: i never suggested that change would be easy or that i could do it alone. democracy in a nation of 300 million people can be noisy and messy and complicated. and when you try to do big things and make big changes, it stirs passions and controversy. that's just how it is. those of us in public office can respond to this reality by playing it safe and avoid telling hard truths and pointing fingers. we can do what's necessary to keep our poll numbers high and get through the next election instead of doing what's best for the next generation. but i also know this: if people had made that decision 50 years ago or 100 years ago or 200 years ago, we wouldn't be here tonight. the only reason we are here is because generations of americans were unafraid to do what was hard, to do what was needed even when success was uncertain, to do what it took to keep the dream of this nation alive for their children and their grandchildren. our administration has had some political setbacks this year, and some of them were deserved. but i wake up every day knowing that they are nothing compared to the setbacks that families all across this country have faced this year. and what keeps me going, what keeps me fighting, is that despite all these setbacks, that spirit of determination and optimism, that fundamental decency that has always been at the core of the american people, that lives on. it lives on in the struggling small-business owner who wrote to me of his company, "none of us," he said, "are willing to consider, even slightly, that we might fail." it lives on in the woman who said that, even though she and her neighbors have felt the pain of recession, "we are strong, we are resilient, we are american." it lives on in the 8-year-old boy in louisiana who just sent me his allowance and asked if i would give it to the people of haiti. and it lives on in all the americans who've dropped everything to go someplace they've never been and pull people they've never known from the rubble, prompting chants of "usa! usa! usa!" when another life was saved. the spirit that has sustained this nation for more than two centuries lives on in you, its people. we have finished a difficult year. we have come through a difficult decade. but a new year has come. a new decade stretches before us. we don't quit. i don't quit. let's seize this moment, to start anew, to carry the dream forward, and to strengthen our union once more.  thank you. god bless you. and god bless the united states of america.